Newalal Dohare vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 February, 2024 Author: Rohit Arya Bench: Rohit Arya 1 Cr..A. No.981/2014 INTHE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH AT G WA L I O R BEFORE HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE ROHIT ARYA & HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE BINOD KUMAR DWIVEDI CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 981 of 2014 BETWEEN:- NEWALAL DOHARE S/O RAMOLE DOHARE R/O WARD NO.10 MADHAIYAPURA P.S. LAHAR DISTRICT BHIND (MADHYA PRADESH) .....APPELLANT (SUSHRI NIKITA JAIN - ADVOCATE FOR THE APPELLANT) AND THE STATE OF MADHYA THROUGH POLICE STATION LAHAR, DISTRTICT BHIND (MADHYA PRADESH) .....RESPONDENT (SHRI RAJESH SHUKLA - ADDITIONAL ADVOCATE GENERAL FOR RESPONDENT/STATE) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Reserved on : 21.2.2024 Pronounced on : 27.02.2024 --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 2 Cr..A. No.981/2014 This Criminal Appeal having been heard and reserved for judgment, coming on for pronouncement this day, Hon'ble Shri Justice Binod Kumar Dwivedi pronounced the following: JUDGMENT This appeal under Section 374 of the Cr.P.C. has been preferred against judgment dated 13.8.2014 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Lahar, District Bhind in Sessions Trial No.18/2013, whereby the appellant has been convicted for the offence punishable under Section 302 of IPC and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life with fine of Rs.20,000/-, with default stipulation. 2. Prosecution story in brief is that on 15.11.2012 at about 2:30 P.M. appellant- Newalal was selling mutton nearby a dirty stream (Nala) on the occasion of Dauj of Diwali. Complainant Ramdas, his brother Hari Singh and Kamlesh were having conversation in front of the house of Gangadeen, at that juncture, younger brother of complainant Ramdas, deceased Ramprasad went to purchase mutton from the appellant and asked for mutton from the accused.	FAC
Appellant Newalal denied to sell mutton to the deceased saying that he has prepared it for Kushwaha community. When deceased Ramprasad insisted for the mutton saying that he is also paying for the same, appellant stood up hurling abuses upon him and with intention to kill Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 3 Cr..A. No.981/2014 stabbed him with knife on the left side in the ribs, due to which blood started oozing out.	FAC
Thereafter he was taken to hospital by hand-cart, where doctors declared him dead. 2.1 Complainant Ramdas, brother of the deceased Ramprasad, lodged a Dehati Nalsi (Ex.P-1) and Merg No.38/12 (Ex.P/14) was registered under Section 174 IPC in Police Station Lahar, District Bhind. After enquiry, FIR was registered at crime No.190/2012 (Ex.P/13) against appellant Newalal under Section 302 of I.P.C. investigation ensued. 2.2 During investigation, the accused was arrested, postmortem of the body of the deceased was conducted, knife used in the incident was seized from the appellant and the clothes of the deceased and blood stained soil etc. were sent to Regional Forensic Science Laboratory, Gwalior, for examination and after completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed against appellant before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Lahar District, Bhind, who committed the case to the Court of Session for trial after completing the formalities under Section 207 of Cr.P.C. 2.3 Charge under Section 302 of I.P.C. was framed and read over to the appellant.	FAC
He abjured the guilt and claimed to be tried. The prosecution, in order to prove its case, examined as many as 9 witnesses before the trial Court.	FAC
Apart this, document Ex.P/1 to Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 4 Cr..A. No.981/2014 Ex.P/18 were also marked in evidence. 2.4 The incriminating circumstances appearing against the appellant were brought to his notice in his examination under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. The appellant either denied or claimed innocence regarding most of the incriminating circumstances and submitted that he has been falsely implicated in this case.	ARG
In support of his defence, he examined Roshan (DW-1), Shailendra Saxena (DW-2) and Randheer Kushawaha (DW-3) and documents Ex.D-1 to D-6 were also marked in his support. The learned trial Court on the basis of evidence adduced before it, vide the impugned judgment held the appellant guilty for offence under Section 302 of the IPC and sentenced him as mentioned hereinabove. 3. Learned counsel for the appellant taking exception to the impugned judgment submits that conviction and sentence recorded by the learned trial Court is erroneous on facts and law.	ARG
The evidence has not been properly appreciated. The finding regarding conviction of the appellant is based on conjectures and surmises of the learned trial Court.	ARG
Therefore, this finding of conviction and consequential sentence may be set aside. 3.1 Alternative limb of the arguments of the counsel for the appellant is that this case on facts does not fall under category of murder as provided under Section 300 of IPC because no Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 5 Cr..A. No.981/2014 premeditation is found proved and also the incident took place at the spur of moment on a trivial matter of not selling of mutton to the deceased. Only single blow of knife was caused by appellant to the deceased.	ARG
Even if the case of the prosecution is taken on its face value, it is a case under Section 304 Part I of IPC . The ingredients to attract the provisions under Section 302 of I.P.C are missing, therefore, the conviction under Section 302 of IPC is bad in law.	Ratio
As appellant has already suffered more than 11 years and 2 months incarceration, learned counsel prays for altering the conviction from section 302 of IPC to Section 304 Part I of IPC with the jail sentence already undergone by the appellant. 4 Per contra, learned counsel for the State has supported the impugned judgment contending that the conviction under Section 302 of IPC and sentence thereupon imposed on the appellant is justified and the instant appeal being devoid of merits deserves to be dismissed at the threshold. 5 Heard learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record. 6 As per the testimony of Dr. K.D.Singh (PW7), who conducted postmortem over the body of the deceased, he found through & through injury of 3-4 cm in size above stomach between 3 rd and 4rth ribs. Left lung and heart were found ruptured.	ARG
He has opined that cause Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 6 Cr..A. No.981/2014 of death is shock due to excessive bleeding and death is homicidal in nature. In cross-examination of the witness, nothing adverse has surfaced which could make his statement unreliable.	FAC
Therefore, as held by learned trial Court, it is found proved that death of the deceased was homicidal in nature. 7. Now it is to be seen whether appellant caused death of the deceased. Ramdas (PW-1), who has lodged Dehati Nalishi (ExP/1), has stated that on the date of incident appellant has slaughtered male goat.	RLC
When deceased Ramprasad asked for mutton, appellant by abusing replied that it is not for him (deceased) and he has prepared it for Kushwaha community persons. When deceased insisted by saying that he is not asking it for free, appellant suddenly stood up and stabbed knife at the left side in his ribs, due to which he fell down.	FAC
He along with his brothers Harisingh (PW-3), Kamlesh (PW-4) and Naresh (PW-5) who were standing there, witnessed the incident. Thereafter they took him to the hospital, where doctor declared him dead.	FAC
During cross-examination, he admitted that appellant and the witness belong to the same family. 8 Harisingh (PW-3) and Kamlesh (PW-4), who were present at the spot, have also supported the prosecution case by their statements before the Court. They have withstood lengthy cross-examination and their testimony remained steady and could not be shaken.	FAC
Story Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 7 Cr..A. No.981/2014 narrated by Ramdas (PW-1) and Kamlesh (PW-4) also finds support from the injury found on the body of the deceased as mentioned in postmortem report (Ex.P/17). Though Naresh (PW-5) has been examined as eye-witness to support the prosecution case, but in cross- examination para 5 he has admitted that he reached the spot after occurrence of the incident and the incident did not take place before him, therefore, his testimony as eye-witness is not reliable. 9. The appellant has made unsuccessful attempt to demolish the case of the prosecution by examining Roshan (DW-1), Shailendra Saxena (DW-2) and Randhir Kushwaha (DW-3), who have stated that when they reached the spot, they saw that Ramdas (PW-1) and Harisingh (PW-3) were beating appellant Newalal.	ARG
When deceased Ramprasad came on the spot, appellant Newalal threw him on the ground. Ramdas (PW-1) was armed with a knife of about 2 ft. in length.	FAC
When he attempted to assault appellant Newalal with knife, appellant Newalal to ward-off the blow kept himself aside and the blow of knife aimed at him landed on deceased Ramprasad. 10. From perusal of the cross-examination of these witnesses, it is apparent that they have not witnessed the genesis of the incident. Roshan (DW-1) has admitted in his cross-examination that he did not see whether mutton was being cut or not.	FAC
Shailendra Saxena (DW-2) has stated before the Court that Newalal told him that Ramdas (PW-1) Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 8 Cr..A. No.981/2014 has assaulted him with a knife on his right hand and he has also assaulted deceased Ramprasad and asked for help in lodging the FIR. In cross-examination, he has admitted that he had gone at petrol pump for filling petrol where Newalal narrated him the above story.	FAC
Thus, it makes clear that he is not an eye-witness to the incident. 11. Randhir Kushwaha (DW-3) has also made an attempt to support the defence story, but in cross-examination he has denied that appellant was cutting mutton on the spot when the incident took place which makes it clear that he was also not present when the incident took place. Circumstances, which appeared in cross-examination of these defence witnesses, make the story narrated by them unreliable.	FAC
Thus, their testimony has been rightly discarded by the learned trial Court. 12. The defence has attempted to impeach the testimony of Ramdas (PW-1) and Harisingh (PW-3) on the ground that they are real brothers of the deceased Ramprasad, therefore, they being partisan witnesses their testimony is not reliable. It is settled position of law that testimony of prosecution witnesses cannot be discarded merely on the ground that they are related to the injured or the deceased.	ARG
Hon'ble the Apex Court in catena of judgments has held that mere relation does not dent the testimony of any witness. In this regard, Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Jodhan Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (2015) 11 SCC 52 has held as under with regard to appreciation of evidence Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 9 Cr..A. No.981/2014 of interested and inimical witness thus: "40. A witness is normally to be considered independent unless he or she springs from sources which are likely to be tainted and that usually means unless the witness has cause, such as enmity against the accused, to wish to implicate him falsely.	PRE
Ordinarily a close (relative) would be the last to screen the real culprit and falsely implicate an innocent person. It is true, when feelings run high and there is personal cause for enmity, that there is a tendency to drag in an innocent person against whom a witness has a grudge along with the guilty, but foundation must be laid for such a criticism and the mere fact of relationship far from being a foundation is often a sure guarantee of truth." 13. In the case of Hari Obula Reddy Vs. State of A.P. (1981) 3 SCC 675, the apex Court has held that evidence of interested witness per se cannot be said to be unreliable evidence.	PRE
Partisanship by itself is not a valid ground for discrediting or discarding testimony of a witness. 14. On the basis of aforesaid law laid down by Hon'ble the Apex Court to the effect that evidence of an interested witness can be relied upon if it is found to be trustworthy and credible. Needless to say, a testimony, if after careful scrutiny is found as unreliable and improbable or suspicious it ought to be rejected.	PRE
Though in the Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 10 Cr..A. No.981/2014 instant case, the eye witnesses Ramdas (PW-1) and Harisingh (PW- 3), who have deposed against the appellant, are the real brothers of the deceased, but their presence on the scene of occurrence cannot be doubted, their version is consistent and nothing has been elicited in the cross examination to shake their testimony. However, there are some minor or trivial discrepancies, but they really do not create a dent in their evidence warranting to treat the same as improbable or untrustworthy. 15. In the case of State of A.P. vs. Pullugummi Kasi Reddy Krishna Reddy reported in (2018) 7 SCC 623, the Apex Court has held as under: "Discrepancies which do not shake the credibility of the witnesses and the basic version of the prosecution case to be discarded, If the evidence of the witnesses as a whole contains the ring of truth, the evidence cannot be doubted." 16. Therefore, the trial Court has rightly relied upon the testimony of these witnesses because they have no motive to falsely implicate the appellant in the instant case and their statements are well corroborated by the medical evidence in regard to the material particulars. 17. Thus, in the light of aforesaid judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court the contention of learned counsel for the appellant that Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 11 Cr..A. No.981/2014 prosecution witnesses are related to the deceased, therefore, their testimony is not reliable does not find favour from this Court.	Ratio
In view of the aforesaid, we do not have the slightest hesitation in coming to the conclusion that it was appellant, who caused the death of deceased Ramprasad. 18. Now in the light of alternative limb of the arguments of learned counsel for the appellant the question arises as to whether the act of the appellant can be brought within the category of culpable homicide not amounting to murder ? 19. Before dwelling upon the facts of the instant case, law propounded by the Apex Court on difference in applicability of Section 299 and Section 300 of IPC which deal with culpable homicide and murder respectively, may profitably be referred. 20. Section 300 of the IPC proceeds with reference to Section 299 of the IPC. 'Culpable homicide' may or may not amount to 'murder', in terms of Section 300 of the IPC. When a 'culpable homicide is mur- der', the punitive consequences shall follow in terms of Section 302 of the IPC, while in other cases, that is, where an offence is 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', punishment would be dealt with under Section 304 of the IPC. Various judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court have dealt with the cases which fall in various classes of firstly, Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 12 Cr..A. No.981/2014 secondly, thirdly and fourthly, respectively, stated under Section 300 of the IPC. 21. The principles stated by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab , AIR 1958 SC 465, are the broad guidelines for the courts to exercise their judicial discretion while con- sidering the cases to determine as to which particular clause of Section 300 of the IPC they fall in. The Supreme Court has time and again de- liberated upon the crucial question of distinction between Sections 299 and 300 of the IPC, i.e. 'culpable homicide' and 'murder' respectively. 22. In Phulia Tudu v. State of Bihar , (2007) 14 SCC 588, the Hon'ble Apex Court noticed that confusion may arise if the courts would lose sight of the true scope and meaning of the terms used by the legislature in these sections.	Ratio
The Apex Court observed that the safest way of approach to the interpretation and application of these provisions seems to be to keep in focus the keywords used in the vari- ous clauses of these sections. 23. In the case of Anda v. State of Rajasthan , AIR 1966 SC 148, the two relevant Sections 299 and 300 respectively are brilliantly ana- lysed and the relevant observations are made at page 151 in para 7. Before we refer to those observations, we would refer to certain obser- vations made earlier. They are as under:-- Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 13 Cr..A. No.981/2014 "The offence of culpable homicide involves the do- ing of an act (which term includes illegal omissions) (a) with the intention of causing death, or (b) with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is like- ly to cause death or (c) with the knowledge that the act is likely to cause death.	PRE
If the death is caused in any of these three circumstances, the offence of cul- pable homicide is said to be committed....... Inten- tion and knowledge in the ingredients of the section postulate the existence of a positive mental attitude and this mental condition is the special mens rea necessary for the offence.	Ratio
The guilty intention in the first two conditions contemplates the intended death of the person harmed or the intentional causing of an injury likely to cause his death. The knowledge in the third condition contemplates knowledge of the death of the person. Sec. 300 tells us when the of- fence is murder and when it is culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Sec. 300 begins by setting out the circumstances when culpable homicide turns out into murder which is punishable under sec. 302 and the exceptions in the same section tell us when of- fence is not murder but culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under sec. 304 .	STA
Murder is an aggravated form of culpable homicide. The existence of one of four conditions turns culpa- ble homicide into murder while the special excep- tions reduce the offence of murder again to culpable homicide not amounting to murder." (Emphasis supplied) Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 14 Cr..A. No.981/2014 24. In the case of Anda (supra) in para 10 it has been further ob- served that:-- "The third clause views the matter from a general stand- point.	PRE
It speaks of an intention to cause bodily injury which is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. The emphasis here is on the sufficiency of the injury in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.	PRE
The sufficiency is the high probability of death in the or- dinary way of nature and when this exists and death en- sues and the causing of such injury is intended the of- fence is murder. Sometimes the nature of the weapon used, sometimes the part of the body on which the injury is caused, and sometimes both are relevant.	PRE
The determi- nant factor is the intentional injury which must be suffi- cient to cause death, that is to say, the probability of death is not so high, the offence does not fall within murder but within culpable homicide not amounting to murder or something less. The illustration appended to the clause 3rdly reads: '(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club- wound sufficient to cause the death of a man in the ordi- nary course of nature. Z dies in consequence.	PRE
Here A is guilty of murder, although he may not have intended to cause Z's death.' The sufficiency of an intentional injury to cause death in the ordinary way of nature is the gist of the clause irrespective of an intention to cause death.	PRE
Here again, the exceptions may bring down the offence to culpable homicide not amounting to murder." (Emphasis supplied) Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 15 Cr..A. No.981/2014 25. The Hon'ble Apex Court in Vineet Kumar Chauhan v. State of U.P. ,(2007) 14 SCC 660, noticed that the academic distinction be- tween 'murder' and 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder' had vividly been brought out by this Court in State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya , (1976) 4 SCC 382, where it was observed as under:-- "...that the safest way of approach to the interpre- tation and application of Sections 299 and 300 of the Code is to keep in focus the key words used in various clauses of the said sections. Minutely com- paring each of the clauses of sections 299 and 300 of the Code and the drawing support from the deci- sions of the court in Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab , (AIR 1958 SC 465:1958 Cri LJ 818) and Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala,(AIR 1966 SC 1874 :1966 Cri LJ 1509) speaking for the court, Justice RS Sarkaria, neatly brought out the points of distinc- tion between the two offences, which have been time and again reiterated.	PRE
Having done so, the court said that wherever the Court is confronted with the question whether the offence is murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder, on the facts of a case, it would be convenient for it to approach the problem in three stages. The question to be consid- ered at the first stage would be that the accused has done an act by doing which he has caused the death of another.	PRE
Two, if such causal connection between the act of the accused and the death, leads to the second stage for considering whether that act of the accused amounts to culpable homicide as defined Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 16 Cr..A. No.981/2014 in section 299 . If the answer to this question is in the negative, the offence would be culpable homi- cide not amounting to murder, punishable under the First or Second part of Section 304 , depending re- spectively, on whether this second or the third clause of Section 299 is applicable.	PRE
If this question is found in the positive but the cases come within any of the exceptions enumerated in Section 300 , the offence would still be culpable homicide not amounting to murder, punishable under the first part of Section 304 of the Code. It was, however, clarified that these were only broad guidelines to facilitate the task of the court and not cast-iron im- perative." (Emphasis supplied) 26. In Hem Raj v. State (Delhi Admn.),1990 Supp SCC 291, the accused inflicted single stab injury landing on the chest of the de- ceased.	PRE
The occurrence admittedly had taken place on the spur of the moment and in heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel. According to the doctor the injury was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.	FAC
The Hon'ble Apex Court observed as under : (SCC p. 295, para 14)"- "14.The question is whether the appellant could be said to have caused that particular injury with the in- tention of causing death of the deceased. As the to- tality of the established facts and circumstances do show that the occurrence had happened most unex- Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 17 Cr..A. No.981/2014 pectedly in a sudden quarrel and without premedita- tion during the course of which the appellant caused a solitary injury, he could not be imputed with the intention to cause death of the deceased or with the intention to cause that particular fatal injury; but he could be imputed with the knowledge that he was likely to cause an injury which was likely to cause death.	Ratio
Because in the absence of any positive proof that the appellant caused the death of the deceased with the intention of causing death or intentionally inflicted that particular injury which in the ordinary course of nature was sufficient to cause death, nei- ther clause I nor clause III of Section 300 IPC will be attracted." (Emphasis supplied) 27. In case of Sudhakar v. State of Maharashtra [ (2012) 9 SCC 725 ] the Supreme Court altered the conviction under Section 302 of I.P.C. to Section 304 Part I of I.P.C . when the appellant to ward off misbehavior of his son, the deceased dealt a single blow of knife which proved fatal. Relevant discussion in para-8 and 9 of the judgment may profitably be reproduced which runs as under:- "8.	PRE
Whatever be the subsequent versions made by PWs 1 and 2 before the court, it came out in evidence that at the time of occurrence there were only three persons, namely, the appellant, PW 1 and the deceased. The admission of PW 1 that the deceased had drinking habit and that whenever he was under the influence of liquor he used to create a Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 18 Cr..A. No.981/2014 ruckus in the house was a factor which had to be necessarily borne in mind while considering the offence alleged and proved against the appellant.	FAC
Though there is variation in the version of PW 1, as between the complaint and her evidence before the court, going by the evidence available on record, the conclusion of the trial court that the appellant was responsible for the death of the deceased is unassailable. Apart from the exclusive presence of the appellant with a weapon in his hand as deposed by PW 2, the other two persons were the deceased and PW 1. The said conclusion of the trial court as well as that of the High Court cannot be doubted.	RLC
Further, the report of the chemical analysis, Exts. 35 and 36 also disclosed that the bloodstained clothes of the appellant matched with the blood group of the deceased which were found on the clothes of the deceased himself. Therefore, there was conclusive proof to hold that it was the appellant who was responsible for the single stab injury inflicted upon the deceased with the aid of the knife seized under Ext. 47. Having reached the above conclusion, the only other question raised was as to whether there is any mitigating circumstance in order to hold that the offence would fall under any of the exceptions to Section 300 IPC to state that it was a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. 9. Going by the narration of the facts disclosed, there was nothing to suggest that there was any premeditation in the mind of the appellant to cause the death of the deceased.	PRE
Taking into account the statement of PW 1 that the deceased was under the influence of liquor and that whenever he was under Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 19 Cr..A. No.981/2014 the influence of liquor he used to throw the household articles and create a ruckus in the house was a factor which created a heat of passion in the appellant who as a father was not in a position to tolerate the behaviour of his son whose misbehaviour under the influence of liquor was the torment. Therefore, unmindful of the consequences, though not in a cruel manner the appellant inflicted a single blow which unfortunately caused severe damage to the vital organs resulting into the death of the deceased.	FAC
In such circumstances, as rightly contended by the learned counsel for the appellant, we are convinced that the offence alleged and as found proved against the appellant can be brought under the first part of Section 304 IPC. Accordingly, while affirming the conviction of the appellant, we are only altering the same as falling under Section 304 Part I IPC in place of Section 302 IPC." 28. In the instant case, as discussed above, it is amply proved that incident took place on the trivial matter of not selling of mutton to the deceased which gave rise to an altercation between deceased and the appellant and it took an ugly shape. On the spur of moment without any premeditation and in a heat of passion, the appellant dealt single blow of knife on the left side of the deceased which proved fatal.	PRE
He stabbed the deceased with the knife only once. No repeat blow was caused by him.	FAC
As such, mens rea and premeditation to kill the deceased cannot be attributed to the appellant, though he certainly Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 20 Cr..A. No.981/2014 had knowledge of causing death of the deceased. 29. As per Exception 4 to Section 300 of the IPC - Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. In the instant case, it cannot be said that the appellant was having an intention to cause death because he despite being armed with ''knife''and having opportunity did not attempt second blow to the deceased.	Ratio
Thus, indicating that the act done by him was without premeditation. It was in the heat of passion because of some altercation between the appellant and his wife.	FAC
It also transpires that the appellant has not taken any undue advantage or has acted in a cruel or unusual manner, therefore, the act of the appellant stands covered by Exception 4 to Section 300 of the IPC. Therefore, in the light of exposition of law by the Apex Court as referred herein above, in our considered opinion, the appellant was liable to be punished u/s. 304 Part 1 of the IPC instead of Section 302 of the IPC. The learned trial Court has not adverted to this factual and legal aspect of the matter, therefore, the conviction recorded against the appellant under Section 302 of IPC deserves to be modified. 30. Resultantly, the appeal is partly allowed. The conviction of the appellant is modified from Section 302 to Section 304 Part 1 of the Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD Signing time: 27-02-2024 04:09:29 PM 21 Cr..A. No.981/2014 IPC .	RPC
As regards sentence, the incident is of the year 2012 and more than eleven years have elapsed. Appellant has suffered more than 11 years and 2 months of incarceration.	FAC
During this period, he has also suffered the ordeal of trial and appeal. Hence, in our considered opinion, his custodial sentence deserves to be reduced to the period already undergone by him.	RPC
Accordingly, the custodial sentence is reduced to the period already undergone although the fine sentence with corresponding default stipulation, as awarded by the trial Court, is maintained. The appeal stands partly allowed accordingly. 31. Appellant is in Jail.	RPC
Subject to depositing the fine amount, if not already deposited, he be released forthwith if not required in any other offence. A copy of this order along with the record of the trial Court be sent to the trial Court for compliance. (ROHIT ARYA) (BINOD KUMAR DWIVEDI) JUDGE JUDGE Ms/- Signature Not Verified Signed by: MADHU SOODAN PRASAD	RPC
