Ram Baboo vs State Of U.P. on 19 December, 2024 Bench: Siddharth , Subhash Chandra Sharma HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD Neutral Citation No. - 2024:AHC:198716-DB Reserved On:- 12.12.2024 Delivered On:- 19.12.2024 Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 3990 of 2009 Appellant :- Ram Baboo Respondent :- State of U.P. Counsel for Appellant :- N.K.	FAC
Mishra Counsel for Respondent :- Govt. Advocate Hon'ble Siddharth, J. Hon'ble Subhash Chandra Sharma, J. (Delivered by Hon'ble Siddharth, J.) 1. Heard Sri Krishna Kumar, learned counsel for the appellant; Sri G.N.	FAC
Kannaujia, learned A.G.A.-I for the State and perused the material on record. 2. This criminal appeal has been preferred against the judgment and order dated 01.06.2009 passed by the Sessions Judge, Mahoba in S.T. No. 159 of 2007 ( State vs. Ram Baboo ) and further to pleased to release the appellant on bail in S.T. No. 159 of 2007, under Section 302 IPC in Case Crime No. 346 of 2007, Police Station- Kabrai, District- Mahoba. 3. The prosecution case, as per F.I.R dated 16.02.2007 is that informant, Udayveer Singh, son of Ram Kishore Singh, his uncle, Ram Bahadur Singh, son of late Kalka Singh and his father, Ram Kishore Singh, aged about 60 years, were sitting at the house of Uma Pandit. At about 4:45 p.m the appellant, Ram Baboo, resident of Chhanikala, who had come to the house of his mama, Bhaiyadeen, resident of village of informant, under the influence of liquor and having a double barrel gun in his hand, came and started talking inappropriately to his father.	FAC
Father of informant pushed him and asked him to go to his relatives, where he has come, but he did not went away and started abusing him. Then the informant, his uncle and his father stood up and started leaving for their house and then the appellant, Ram Baboo, suddenly got excited and fired on his father on his backside by his double barrel gun.	FAC
Informant or the deceased had no enmity with the appellant. Father of the informant fell on the ground after suffering gun shot injury and was taken to the hospital at Kabrai but he died in the way.	FAC
After keeping the dead body of the deceased outside the police station, F.I.R was lodged at police station Kabrai, District- Mahoba, on the same day at about 06:05 p.m. 4. For proving the prosecution case, the prosecution examined, P.W.-1, Udaiveer Singh, informant; P.W.-2, Ram Bahadur Singh; P.W.-3, Constable Ranjeet Prasad; P.W.-4, Dr. Pratap Singh and P.W.-5, Sub-Inspector Rama Shankar. 5. Statement of appellant under Section 313 Cr.P.C was recorded wherein he submitted that he has been falsely implicated in this case on account of party politics. 6. P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 stated before the trial court the prosecution story as per the allegations in the F.I.R. P.W.-3, P.W.-4 and P.W.-5 are formal witnesses who proved their parts of the investigation conducted by them. 7. Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that it is clear from the F.I.R itself that there was no enmity or motive on the part of the appellant as admitted by P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 in their statements. He has submitted that it is a case of single shot.	FAC
There was one gun shot wound of entry on the back of deceased and corresponding wound of exit on the front side of his body. He has submitted that in the absence of any motive and only wound of fire arm entry on the body of deceased, even if all the allegations are accepted to be correct, the case of appellant will not travel beyond Section 304 , Part-II IPC . 8. Learned A.G.A has vehemently opposed the submissions made by learned counsel for the appellant and has submitted that the appellant has caused the offence of culpable homicide amounting to murder and it was clearly proved by the prosecution before the trial court.	ARG
The deceased caused the gun shot injury on the back of the deceased with intention to cause his murder for which he had motive since the deceased had pushed him and asked him to go back to his relatives. Annoyed by the conduct of deceased the appellant caused his murder and hence the judgment of the trial court is justified. 9. In order to appreciate the arguments of learned Counsel for the parties reference is being made to pronouncement made by Hon'ble Supreme Court on the subject in Rampal Singh vs. State of U.P. reported in (2012) 8 SCC 289, MANU/SC/0589/2012.	PRE
In following paragraphs Apex Court has discussed the distinction between Section 302 and 304 I.P.C. as well as distinction between Section 304 Clause I and II, which are extracted hereunder:- "10. Sections 299 and 300 of the Code deal with the definition of 'culpable homicide' and 'murder', respectively.	STA
In terms of Section 299 , 'culpable homicide' is described as an act of causing death (i) with the intention of causing death or (ii) with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or (iii) with the knowledge that such an act is likely to cause death. As is clear from a reading of this provision, the former part of it, emphasises on the expression 'intention' while the latter upon 'knowledge'.	STA
Both these are positive mental attitudes, however, of different degrees. The mental element in 'culpable homicide', that is, the mental attitude towards the consequences of conduct is one of intention and knowledge.	Ratio
Once an offence is caused in any of the three stated manners noted-above, it would be 'culpable homicide'. Section 300 , however, deals with 'murder' although there is no clear definition of 'murder' in Section 300 of the Code.	STA
As has been repeatedly held by this Court, 'culpable homicide' is the genus and 'murder' is its species and all 'murders' are 'culpable homicides' but all 'culpable homicides' are not 'murders'. 11. Another classification that emerges from this discussion is 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', punishable under Section 304 of the Code. There is again a very fine line of distinction between the cases falling under Section 304 , Part I and Part II, which we shall shortly discuss. 12. In the case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. Rayavarapu Punnayya and Anr. MANU/SC/0180/1976 : (1976) 4 SCC 382, this Court while clarifying the distinction between these two terms and their consequences, held as under: 12. In the scheme of the penal Code, 'culpable homicide' is genus and 'murder' its species.	PRE
All 'murder' is 'culpable homicide' but not vice-versa. Speaking generally, 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder'.	PRE
For the purpose of fixing punishment, proportionate to the gravity of this generic offence, the Code practically recognises three degrees of culpable homicide. The first is, what may be called 'culpable homicide of the first degree'.	PRE
This is the greatest form of culpable homicide, which is defined in Section 300 as 'murder'. The second may be termed as 'culpable homicide of the second degree'.	STA
This is punishable under the first part of Section 304 . Then, there is 'culpable homicide of the third degree'.	STA
This is the lowest type of culpable homicide and the punishment provided for it is, also, the lowest among the punishments provided for the three grades. Culpable homicide of this degree is punishable under the second part of Section 304 . 13. Section 300 of the Code proceeds with reference to Section 299 of the Code. 'Culpable homicide' may or may not amount to 'murder', in terms of Section 300 of the Code.	STA
When a 'culpable homicide is murder', the punitive consequences shall follow in terms of Section 302 of the Code while in other cases, that is, where an offence is 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', punishment would be dealt with under Section 304 of the Code. Various judgments of this Court have dealt with the cases which fall in various classes of firstly, secondly, thirdly and fourthly, respectively, stated under Section 300 of the Code.	STA
It would not be necessary for us to deal with that aspect of the case in any further detail. of course, the principles that have been stated in various judgments like Abdul Waheed Khan @ Waheed and Ors. v. State of A.P. [MANU/SC/0708/2002 : (2002) 7 SCC 175], Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab [MANU/SC/0041/1958 : AIR 1958 SC 465] and Rajwant and Anr. v. State of Kerala [AIR 1966 SC 1874] are the broad guidelines and not cast-iron imperatives. These are the cases which would provide precepts for the courts to exercise their judicial discretion while considering the cases to determine as to which particular clause of Section 300 of the Code they fall in. 14. This Court has time and again deliberated upon the crucial question of distinction between Sections 299 and 300 of the Code, i.e., 'culpable homicide' and 'murder' respectively.	PRE
In the case of Phulia Tudu and Anr. v. State of Bihar (now Jharkhand) [MANU/SC/7909/2007 : AIR 2007 SC 3215], the Court noticed that confusion is caused if courts, losing sight of the true scope and meaning of the terms used by the legislature in these sections, allow themselves to be drawn into minute abstractions. The safest way of approach to the interpretation and application of these provisions seems to be to keep in focus the keywords used in the various clauses of these sections.	PRE
The Court provided the following comparative table to help in appreciating the points of discussion between these two offences: Section 299 Section 300 A person commits culpable homicide if the act by which the death is caused is done Subject to certain exceptions culpable homicide is murder if the act by which the death is caused is done - INTENTION (a) with the intention of death; or (1) with the intention of causing death; or (b) with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; or (2) with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused; or (3) with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death; or KNOWLEDGE (c) with the knowledge that the act is likely to cause death . (4) with the knowledge that the act is so imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and without any excuse or incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as is mentioned above. 15. Section 300 of the Code states what kind of acts, when done with the intention of causing death or bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause death or causing bodily injury to any person, which is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death or the person causing injury knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death, would amount to 'murder'. It is also 'murder' when such an act is committed, without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such bodily injury.	STA
The Section also prescribes the exceptions to 'culpable homicide amounting to murder'. The explanations spell out the elements which need to be satisfied for application of such exceptions, like an act done in the heat of passion and without pre-mediation.	STA
Where the offender whilst being deprived of the power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation causes the death of the person who has caused the provocation or causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident, provided such provocation was not at the behest of the offender himself, 'culpable homicide would not amount to murder'. This exception itself has three limitations.	STA
All these are questions of facts and would have to be determined in the facts and circumstances of a given case. 16. This Court in the case of Vineet Kumar Chauhan v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0366/2008 : (2007) 14 SCC 660 noticed that academic distinction between 'murder' and 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder' had vividly been brought out by this Court in State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya [MANU/SC/0180/1976 : (1976) 4 SCC 382], where it was observed as under: ... that the safest way of approach to the interpretation and application of Section 299 and 300 of the Code is to keep in focus the key words used in various clauses of the said sections. Minutely comparing each of the clauses of Section 299 and 300 of the Code and the drawing support from the decisions of the court in Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab and Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala, speaking for the court, Justice RS Sarkaria, neatly brought out the points of distinction between the two offences, which have been time and again reiterated.	PRE
Having done so, the court said that wherever the Court is confronted with the question whether the offence is murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder, on the facts of a case, it would be convenient for it to approach the problem in three stages. The question to be considered at the first stage would be that the accused has done an act by doing which he has caused the death of another.	PRE
Two, if such causal connection between the act of the accused and the death, leads to the second stage for considering whether that act of the accused amounts to culpable homicide as defined in Section 299 . If the answer to this question is in the negative, the offence would be culpable homicide not amounting to murder, punishable under the First or Second part of Section 304 , depending respectively, on whether this second or the third clause of Section 299 is applicable.	PRE
If this question is found in the positive, but the cases come within any of the exceptions enumerated in Section 300 , the offence would still be culpable homicide not amounting to murder, punishable under the first part of Section 304 of the Code. It was, however, clarified that these were only broad guidelines to facilitate the task of the court and not cast-iron imperative. 17. Having noticed the distinction between 'murder' and 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', now we are required to explain the distinction between the application of Section 302 of the Code on the one hand and Section 304 of the Code on the other. 18. In Ajit Singh v. State of Punjab [(2011) 9 SCC 462], the Court held that in order to hold whether an offence would fall under Section 302 or Section 304 Part I of the Code, the courts have to be extremely cautious in examining whether the same falls under Section 300 of the Code which states whether a culpable homicide is murder, or would it fall under its five exceptions which lay down when culpable homicide is not murder.	PRE
In other words, Section 300 states both, what is murder and what is not. First finds place in Section 300 in its four stated categories, while the second finds detailed mention in the stated five exceptions to Section 300 .	STA
The legislature in its wisdom, thus, covered the entire gamut of culpable homicide that 'amounting to murder' as well as that 'not amounting to murder' in a composite manner in Section 300 of the Code. Sections 302 and 304 of the Code are primarily the punitive provisions.	STA
They declare what punishment a person would be liable to be awarded, if he commits either of the offences. 19. An analysis of these two Sections must be done having regard to what is common to the offences and what is special to each one of them. The offence of culpable homicide is thus an offence which may or may not be murder.	Ratio
If it is murder, then it is culpable homicide amounting to murder, for which punishment is prescribed in Section 302 of the Code. Section 304 deals with cases not covered by Section 302 and it divides the offence into two distinct classes, that is (a) those in which the death is intentionally caused; and (b) those in which the death is caused unintentionally but knowingly.	STA
In the former case the sentence of imprisonment is compulsory and the maximum sentence admissible is imprisonment for life. In the latter case, imprisonment is only optional, and the maximum sentence only extends to imprisonment for 10 years. The first clause of this section includes only those cases in which offence is really 'murder', but mitigated by the presence of circumstances recognized in the exceptions to Section 300 of the Code, the second clause deals only with the cases in which the accused has no intention of injuring anyone in particular.	Ratio
In this regard, we may also refer to the judgment of this Court in the case of Fatta v. Emperor, 1151. C. 476 (Refer: Penal Law of India by Dr. Hari Singh Gour, Volume 3, 2009 ) 20. Thus, where the act committed is done with the clear intention to kill the other person, it will be a murder within the meaning of Section 300 of the Code and punishable under Section 302 of the Code but where the act is done on grave and sudden provocation which is not sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender himself, the offence would fall under the exceptions to Section 300 of the Code and is punishable under Section 304 of the Code. Another fine tool which would help in determining such matters is the extent of brutality or cruelty with which such an offence is committed. 21. An important corollary to this discussion is the marked distinction between the provisions of Section 304 Part I and Part II of the Code.	Ratio
Linguistic distinction between the two Parts of Section 304 is evident from the very language of this Section. There are two apparent distinctions, one in relation to the punishment while other is founded on the intention of causing that act, without any intention but with the knowledge that the act is likely to cause death. It is neither advisable nor possible to state any straight-jacket formula that would be universally applicable to all cases for such determination.	Ratio
Every case essentially must be decided on its own merits. The Court has to perform the very delicate function of applying the provisions of the Code to the facts of the case with a clear demarcation as to under what category of cases, the case at hand falls and accordingly punish the accused. 10. We have carefully gone through the evidence on record and also the rival submissions.	Ratio
In view of the law settled by the Apex Court mentioned hereinabove, we find that the F.I.R in this case was lodged promptly with regard to the incident and it has been mentioned therein that when the informant, deceased and uncle of informant were sitting on the platform situated outside of the house of the Pandit Uma Shankar, the appellant came in drunken state and started talking inappropriately with the deceased whereon the deceased got annoyed and pushed him asking him to go to the house of his relative, where he had come from his village. Thereafter, the deceased started abusing him and the deceased and two others sitting with him stood up and started for their house.	FAC
As they were leaving, appellant is said to have fired on the back of the deceased, the father of the informant, a single shot. He fell down and died.	FAC
It is clearly mentioned in the F.I.R itself that there was no enmity between the deceased and the appellant and therefore the appellant had no intention to cause the murder of deceased. It is clear from the F.I.R and the statements of witnesses also that the deceased was under the influence of liquor and was making unwanted utterances before the deceased, informant and his uncle.	FAC
The deceased got annoyed and asked him to leave. Thereafter, it is alleged that while they were leaving appellant caused single fatal fire arm injury to the deceased.	FAC
Therefore, it is clear that there may have taken place some heated verbal altercation between the deceased and the appellant, who was inebriated and after the deceased and two others left the place, where the altercation took place and had proceeded only few paces, appellant fired from behind on the deceased. A single fire arm injury proved fatal for the deceased and he died. It is evidently clear that there was no pre-meditation on the part of the appellant and further there is no evidence that the appellant made any special preparation for assault on deceased with the intent to kill.	FAC
The appellant belongs to different village. He was not the resident of the village of the deceased, nor it is stated anywhere by any witness that any dispute ever took place between both the sides.	FAC
The appellant had committed the offence firstly in the heat of passion, secondly, without pre-meditation and thirdly, in the state of inebriation. Section 304 IPC deals with cases not covered under Section 302 IPC. It divides offences under Section 304 IPC in two distinct classes (a) in which death is intentionally caused and (b) cases in which death is caused unintentionally but knowingly.	STA
From the proved facts and circumstances of this case, it cannot be said that appellant had intention that action on his part would cause death or will cause bodily injury as it likely to cause death. His act was unintentional but done knowingly. 11. Thus, having regard to the evidence on record, in our considered opinion, the case of the appellant will fall under Section 304 Part-II IPC , hence, his conviction under Section 302 IPC is set aside.	RPC
The trial court has committed error in convicting and sentencing the appellant for committing the offence under Section 302 I.P.C. The appellant is found guilty of committing the offence under Section 304 Part-II I.P.C . He has been granted remission in sentence by the State Government after about 13 years of incarceration in jail. 12. We are of the view that interest of justice would be served by holding that the sentence undergone by the appellant would be sufficient punishment for committing offence under Section 304- Part-II I.P.C .	RPC
However, fine of Rs. 30,000/- is directed to be paid to the informant or his legal heirs, as the case may, be within two months by the appellant. In case of non-deposit of fine, appellant will undergo simple imprisonment of six months. 13. The appeal is partly allowed. 14. Let this judgment be notified to the trial court and its record be returned within period of two weeks.	RPC
Order Date :- 19.12.2024 Rohit	FAC
