Mukesh Topno Son Of Late Lalo Topno vs The State Of Jharkhand on 4 March, 2024 Author: Ananda Sen Bench: Ananda Sen Criminal Appeal (D.B.) No. 120 of 2016 [arising out of Judgment of conviction dated 23rd day of September, 2015 and order of sentence dated 7th October, 2015 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Simdega in Sessions Trial No.202 of 2011] Mukesh Topno son of late Lalo Topno, resident of Village Jaldega, PO PS Jaldega, District Simdega. ... Appellant -versus- The State of Jharkhand ...	RLC
Respondent For the Appellant : Ms. Bharti Kumari, Advocate For the Respondent : Mr. Vineet Kumar Vashistha, A.P.P. PRESENT: SRI ANANDA SEN, J. SRI SUBHASH CHAND, J. ---- JUDGMENT Per Ananda Sen, J. Appellant has preferred this appeal against the Judgment of Conviction and Order of Sentence dated 23rd September, 2015 and 7th October, 2015 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Simdega in Sessions Trial No.202 of 2011, whereby and whereunder the appellant has been convicted under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and has been sentenced to undergo life imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- for the offence under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and in default of payment of fine, appellant has to suffer three months' additional simple imprisonment. 2. Jashmani Topno (informant) who is wife of the deceased and mother of the appellant, in her beyan stated that on 23.10.2011 at about 07.00 p.m. her husband Lalo Topno (deceased) and her son Mukesh Topno (appellant) were taking dinner in the house.	RLC
In the meantime, her son started demanding money to purchase one motorcycle, which her husband refused on the ground that now he does not have money as he spent his entire money upon them. On this reply appellant, who was under the influence of alcohol, became ferocious and after leaving food, he rushed towards his room and brought one hockey stick and started assaulting her husband (deceased).	FAC
She tried to save her husband, but the appellant struck hockey stick on the forehead of her husband, thus, he sustained injury, blood started oozing and he became senseless. On her alarm, neighbours reached.	FAC
With their help, she brought her husband at Jaldega Hospital, where the doctor declared him as dead. She has further alleged that in the course of saving her husband, she also sustained injury on her head. -: 2 :- 3. On the basis of the fardbeyan of the informant, Jaldega Police Station Case No.33 of 2011 dated 23.10.2011 was registered under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code against the appellant.	FAC
After investigation, chargesheet was submitted, whereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Simdega took cognizance of the offence and the case was committed to the Court of Sessions. Charge was framed against the appellant under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and trial was started. 5. Prosecution, in order to bring home the charge, had examined altogether 10 (ten) witnesses, namely, P.W.1 Rashmi Topno, P.W.	FAC
Jina Topno, P.W.3 Jashmani Topno, P.W.4 Dr. Prabhu Sahay Linda, P.W.5 Albert Bilung, P.W.6 Tarsious Bage, P.W.7 Dr. Aradhana Sanga, P.W.8 Prithibi Harizan, P.W.9 Ajaj Ahmad Khan. One Court Witness, namely, C.W.1 Manas Kumar Das was also examined. P.W.1 Rashmi Topno is the daughter of the deceased and sister of the appellant.	FAC
She has stated in her evidence that her mother was serving food to her father and her brother, but in the meantime, the appellant demanded money from the deceased to purchase one motorcycle on which the deceased replied that now he does not have the money and on this issue, the appellant brought one hockey stick and hit on the head of the deceased and due to the injuries, he became unconscious. The deceased was brought to the hospital, where the deceased was declared dead.	FAC
She further stated that the appellant used to consume alcohol. P.W.2 is Jina Topno is the son of the deceased and brother of the appellant. He has stated in his evidence that on 23.10.2011 at about 07.00 p.m. her mother (P.W.3) was providing food to her father (deceased), to him and her brother Mukesh Topno (appellant), but in the meantime, the appellant demanded money from the deceased to purchase one motorcycle on which deceased replied that now he does not have the money as he has spent his entire money upon them.	FAC
Out of rage, the appellant brought one hockey stick and hit on the head of the deceased and he died spontaneously. He further stated in his cross-examination that the appellant is mentally fit and he used to consume alcohol and appellant has given single blow on the head of the deceased. P.W.3 Jashmani Topno is the informant.	FAC
She is wife of the deceased and mother of the appellant. She has stated in her evidence that on the date of occurrence at about 07.00 p.m. she was in her house and at the -: 3 :- time when she was providing food to her husband (deceased) and to her son (appellant).	FAC
In the meantime, the appellant demanded money from her husband to purchase one motorcycle, but her husband replied that the entire money has been spent upon him and he has no money. Then the accused brought one hockey stick from his room and hit on the head of the deceased whereafter he died.	FAC
She further stated that she does not know whether the appellant is mentally unstable or not and whether he used to consume alcohol or not. P.W.4 Dr. Prabhu Sahay Linda is the Medical Officer, who conducted Postmortem Examination of the deceased. He found the following: - a.	FAC
On General Examination : Physique was average built, nutrition was good, rigor mortis was present in all four limbs, body was not decomposed. b. External Examination: i.	FAC
Both eyes were closed, mouth was closed and tongue inside the mouth. ii. Lacerated wound 2" x ½ x bone deep over right posterior side of head just behind the right ear iii.	FAC
Small abrasion over left elbow ½" x 1". c. Internal Examination i.	FAC
The right occipital bone is fractured (depressed fractures) adjacent to the wound. ii. Cranial cavity containing blood. iii.	FAC
Brain and maninges adjacent to the wound are hyperaemic and injured. d. Weapon used: Hard and blunt surface object.	FAC
As per opinion of the doctor, conducting the postmortem examination, the cause of death is cardio respiratory failure due to neurogenic and haemorphagic shock caused by above mentioned injury. He further opined that such injuries are possible if one falls from a long height forcefully. P.W.5, Albert Bilung is the tenant of the deceased.	FAC
He deposed that as on 23.10.2011 at about 07.00 p.m. he was at village Jalasrinager Near Jaldega and on hearing alarm, he came out from his house and saw that the deceased was lying on the ground sustaining injury on his head. Then he informed the relatives of the deceased.	FAC
Thereafter he came to know that on -: 4 :- the same evening while taking dinner some hot exchange of words took place in between the deceased and his son (appellant) and on this issue the accused took out one hockey stick from his room and struck a blow with hockey stick on the head of the deceased, resulting in his death. The fact of the occurrence was disclosed to him by Rashmi Topno (P.W.1). P.W.6 Tarcious Bage deposed that on 23.10.2011 at 07.00 p.m. he was in the market and at about 08.00 p.m. when he returned from market, he heard that the deceased has been taken to the hospital because he sustained injuries. P.W.7 Aradhana Sanga is the Medical Officer.	FAC
She examined the injured namely Jashmani Topno (P.W.3) and found the following injuries: - a. Lacerated wound on right side of the scalp: 2" x ¼" x ¼" As per the opinion of the doctor examining the injured, weapon used was blunt object and nature of injuries has been opined to be simple.	FAC
She has stated that such injury may be possible on fall. P.W.8, Prithibi Harizan is the Investigating Officer of the case. He has stated in his evidence that on 21.10.2011, he took the charge of further investigation of Jaldega P.S. Case No.23 of 2011 and in the course of his investigation, he received the injury report and postmortem report and as per direction of superior police officer, he submitted chargesheet in this case. P.W.9 Ajaj Ahmad Khan is also an Investigating Officer of the case.	FAC
He has stated in his evidence that in course of investigation, he recorded the statement of the concerned witness in the case diary, inspected the place of occurrence, recovered a hockey stick from the room of the appellant and seized the said hockey stick. Thereafter on 21.11.2011, he handed over the investigation to the Officer-in-charge.	FAC
During his evidence, he stated that the inquest report of deceased was prepared by S.I.B.D Manjhi but the copy of the said inquest report is not available in the case diary. C.W.1 Manas Kumar Das, a Court Witness, is a local police constable. He produced one hockey stick which was exhibited as Material Exhibit I. 6. Upon conclusion of the evidence of the prosecution, appellant's statement was recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.	FAC
He did not choose to lead evidence. -: 5 :- 7. After hearing the parties, upon conclusion of the trial, the appellant has been convicted and sentenced by the Judgment of Conviction and Order of Sentence dated 23rd September, 2015 and 7th October, 2015, as mentioned in paragraph 1 of this judgment. 8. Challenging the aforesaid judgment of conviction and order of sentence, the appellant has preferred this appeal. 9. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submits that there is lack of motive or intention on the part of the appellant, which is one of the important ingredients of Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. The incident occurred in sudden spur of moment and it was not a planned action.	ARG
He further submits that the Trial Court has not considered the aforesaid fact while convicting the appellant under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. The intention of the deceased was not to commit murder would be evident from the fact that only one blow was given by the appellant and that too under the influence of liquor.	ARG
Thus, he prays for acquittal from the charges under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. 10. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State submits that all the prosecution witnesses have duly supported the case of the prosecution, which is corroborated by the Postmortem Report, Injury Report of the informant, seizure list and other documents presented by the prosecution, thus, the conviction must be sustained. 11. After hearing the counsel for the parties, we have gone through the records of the case and evidence. 12. The appellant was convicted under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. On going through the deposition of prosecution witnesses, we find that at the time of occurrence, the appellant and deceased were having dinner together and informant was serving food to them.	ARG
They were also drinking liquor. In the meantime, the appellant asked the deceased for money to purchase one motorcycle to which deceased denied and stated that he does not have money as he has spent his entire money upon them.	FAC
Upon this reply, appellant became ferocious and leaving food, he rushed towards his room and brought one hockey stick and gave a blow on head of the deceased, resulting in his death. This is the consistent evidence led by the prosecution witnesses, who are also the eye witnesses.	FAC
It appears that out of rage the appellant struck the deceased. It is also admitted that only one blow was given. -: 6 :- 13. Since there is no dispute with regard to homicidal death of the deceased, we do not find it necessary to refer to the medical evidence. 14. The question that falls for consideration is as to whether the conviction under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code would be required to be maintained or whether the case would fall under a lesser offence. 15. The Supreme Court, in the case of State of A.P. versus Rayavarapu Punnayya , reported in (1976) 4 SCC 382 has held that while dealing with distinction between Section 299 and Section 300 , in order to decide whether an offence is 'murder' or 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', the Courts to approach the problem in three stages.	PRE
Firstly, whether the accused has done an act which has caused the death of another. Proof of such causal connection between the act of the accused and the death leads to the second stage for considering whether that act of the accused amounts to "culpable homicide" as defined in Section 299 .	Ratio
If the answer to this question is in the affirmative, the Court should determine whether the facts bring the case within the ambit of any of the four clauses of the definition of 'murder' under Section 300 . If the answer is in the negative, the offence would be 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', punishable under the first or the second part of Section 304 , depending, respectively on whether the second or the third clause of Section 299 is applicable.	Ratio
If the answer is positive, but the case comes within any of the exceptions enumerated in Section 300 , the offence would still be 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', punishable under the first part of Section 304 . 16. The Supreme Court in the case of Anbazhagan v. State represented by Inspector of Police, reported in 2023 SCC OnLine SC 857 has succinctly explained the fine distinction between the cases that would fall under Section 302 , Section 304 Part 1 and Section 304 Part II of the IPC . It is necessary here to quote para 66 of the judgment.	PRE
It is here as under:- 66. Few important principles of law discernible from the aforesaid discussion may be summed up thus:-- (1) When the court is confronted with the question, what offence the accused could be said to have committed, the true test is to find out the intention or knowledge of the accused in doing the act. If the intention or knowledge was such as is described in Clauses (1) to (4) of Section 300 of the IPC, the act will be murder even though only a single injury was caused.	PRE
To illustrate:'A' is bound hand and foot. 'B' comes and placing his revolver against the head of 'A', shoots 'A' in his head killing him instantaneously. Here, there will be no difficulty in holding that the intention of 'B' in shooting 'A' was to kill him, though only single injury was caused.	PRE
The case would, therefore, be of murder falling within Clause (1) of Section 300 of the IPC. Taking another instance, 'B' sneaks into the bed room of his enemy 'A' while the latter is asleep on his bed. Taking aim at the left chest of 'A', 'B' forcibly plunges a sword in -: 7 :- the left chest of 'A' and runs away. 'A' dies shortly thereafter.	FAC
The injury to 'A' was found to be sufficient in ordinary course of nature to cause death. There may be no difficulty in holding that 'B' intentionally inflicted the particular injury found to be caused and that the said injury was objectively sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.	Ratio
This would bring the act of 'B' within Clause (3) of Section 300 of the IPC and render him guilty of the offence of murder although only single injury was caused. (2) Even when the intention or knowledge of the accused may fall within Clauses (1) to (4) of Section 300 of the IPC, the act of the accused which would otherwise be murder, will be taken out of the purview of murder, if the accused's case attracts any one of the five exceptions enumerated in that section. In the event of the case falling within any of those exceptions, the offence would be culpable homicide not amounting to murder, falling within Part 1 of Section 304 of the IPC, if the case of the accused is such as to fall within Clauses (1) to (3) of Section 300 of the IPC. It would be offence under Part II of Section 304 if the case is such as to fall within Clause (4) of Section 300 of the IPC. Again, the intention or knowledge of the accused may be such that only 2nd or 3rd part of Section 299 of the IPC, may be attracted but not any of the clauses of Section 300 of the IPC. In that situation also, the offence would be culpable homicide not amounting to murder under Section 304 of the IPC. It would be an offence under Part I of that section, if the case fall within 2nd part of Section 299 , while it would be an offence under Part II of Section 304 if the case fall within 3rd part of Section 299 of the IPC. (3) To put it in other words, if the act of an accused person falls within the first two clauses of cases of culpable homicide as described in Section 299 of the IPC it is punishable under the first part of Section 304 . If, however, it falls within the third clause, it is punishable under the second part of Section 304 .	STA
In effect, therefore, the first part of this section would apply when there is 'guilty intention,' whereas the second part would apply when there is no such intention, but there is 'guilty knowledge'. (4) Even if single injury is inflicted, if that particular injury was intended, and objectively that injury was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, the requirements of Clause 3rdly to Section 300 of the IPC, are fulfilled and the offence would be murder. (5) Section 304 of the IPC will apply to the following classes of cases : (i) when the case falls under one or the other of the clauses of Section 300 , but it is covered by one of the exceptions to that Section, (ii) when the injury caused is not of the higher degree of likelihood which is covered by the expression 'sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death' but is of a lower degree of likelihood which is generally spoken of as an injury 'likely to cause death' and the case does not fall under Clause (2) of Section 300 of the IPC, (iii) when the act is done with the knowledge that death is likely to ensue but without intention to cause death or an injury likely to cause death. To put it more succinctly, the difference between the two parts of Section 304 of the IPC is that under the first part, the crime of murder is first established and the accused is then given the benefit of one of the exceptions to Section 300 of the IPC, while under the second part, the crime of murder is never established at all.	Ratio
Therefore, for the purpose of holding an accused guilty of the offence punishable under the second part of Section 304 of the IPC, the accused need not bring his case within one of the exceptions to Section 300 of the IPC. (6) The word 'likely' means probably and it is distinguished from more 'possibly'. When chances of happening are even or greater than its not happening, we may say that the thing will 'probably happen'.	Ratio
In reaching the conclusion, the court has to place itself in the situation of the accused and then judge whether the accused had the knowledge that by the act he was likely to cause death. (7) The distinction between culpable homicide ( Section 299 of the IPC) and murder ( Section 300 of the IPC) has always to be carefully borne in mind while dealing with a charge under Section 302 of the IPC. Under the category of unlawful homicides, -: 8 :- both, the cases of culpable homicide amounting to murder and those not amounting to murder would fall. Culpable homicide is not murder when the case is brought within the five exceptions to Section 300 of the IPC. But, even though none of the said five exceptions are pleaded or prima facie established on the evidence on record, the prosecution must still be required under the law to bring the case under any of the four clauses of Section 300 of the IPC to sustain the charge of murder.	Ratio
If the prosecution fails to discharge this onus in establishing any one of the four clauses of Section 300 of the IPC, namely, 1stly to 4thly, the charge of murder would not be made out and the case may be one of culpable homicide not amounting to murder as described under Section 299 of the IPC. (8) The court must address itself to the question of mens rea. If Clause thirdly of Section 300 is to be applied, the assailant must intend the particular injury inflicted on the deceased.	Ratio
This ingredient could rarely be proved by direct evidence. Inevitably, it is a matter of inference to be drawn from the proved circumstances of the case.	Ratio
The court must necessarily have regard to the nature of the weapon used, part of the body injured, extent of the injury, degree of force used in causing the injury, the manner of attack, the circumstances preceding and attendant on the attack. (9) Intention to kill is not the only intention that makes a culpable homicide a murder. The intention to cause injury or injuries sufficient in the ordinary cause of nature to cause death also makes a culpable homicide a murder if death has actually been caused and intention to cause such injury or injuries is to be inferred from the act or acts resulting in the injury or injuries. (10) When single injury inflicted by the accused results in the death of the victim, no inference, as a general principle, can be drawn that the accused did not have the intention to cause the death or that particular injury which resulted in the death of the victim.	Ratio
Whether an accused had the required guilty intention or not, is a question of fact which has to be determined on the facts of each case. (11) Where the prosecution proves that the accused had the intention to cause death of any person or to cause bodily injury to him and the intended injury is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, then, even if he inflicts a single injury which results in the death of the victim, the offence squarely falls under Clause thirdly of Section 300 of the IPC unless one of the exceptions applies. (12) In determining the question, whether an accused had guilty intention or guilty knowledge in a case where only a single injury is inflicted by him and that injury is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, the fact that the act is done without premeditation in a sudden fight or quarrel, or that the circumstances justify that the injury was accidental or unintentional, or that he only intended a simple injury, would lead to the inference of guilty knowledge, and the offence would be one under Section 304 Part II of the IPC . 17. The Supreme Court very recently, in the case of Nirmala Devi vs State of Himachal Pradesh reported in 2023 SCC OnLine SC 899 has altered the conviction from Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code to that of 304 part 1 of the Indian Penal Code and held that the possibility of the appellant causing the death of the deceased while being deprived of the power of self- control, due to the provocation on account of the deceased cannot be ruled out. The weapon used in the crime is a stick which was lying in the house, and which, by no means, can be called a deadly weapon.	PRE
It will be also necessary to take into consideration the background in which the offence took place. There used to be persistent quarrels between the deceased and the appellant. -: 9 :- 18. The Supreme Court in the case of Mariappan v. State represented by Inspector of Police reported in 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1594 applying Exception 4 of Section 300 , convicting the accused for culpable homicide not amounting to murder due to a killing in a fit of anger during a passionate verbal quarrel.	PRE
The Court found the act was impulsive, lacking clear intent for murder. 19. In the present case, while looking at the facts which surfaced during evidence, it is proved that the appellant had suddenly in the outrage hit on the head of the deceased during a heated verbal argument with the deceased. There is no element of a pre-planned attack with the sole intention of causing the death of the deceased.	FAC
The appellant had acted "suddenly", in the heat of passion and without a pre-planned approach. Further, the appellant was consuming alcohol.	FAC
Admittedly, only one blow was given and there was no repetition. 20. Hence, it can be safely concluded from the evidence led in the present case that the appellant's overt act of killing the deceased happened during a fit of anger in the heat of a passionate verbal quarrel and would fall under Exception 4 to Section 300 of the Indian Penal Code. Moreover, the clear intent indeed to prove culpable homicide amounting to murder has also not been established by the prosecution in this case. 21. Thus, the conviction under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and the sentence is set aside.	RPC
The conviction under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code is converted to that of Section 304 Part-I with sentence of 10 years Rigorous Imprisonment. 22. Since the appellant has already served the sentence, he is ordered to be released forthwith, if not wanted in any other case. 23. This appeal is, thus, allowed in part. Pending interlocutory applications, if any, stand disposed of. 24. Let the Trial Court Records be transmitted to the Court concerned along with a copy of this judgment. (Ananda Sen, J.) (Subhash Chand, J.) High Court of Jharkhand, Ranchi	RPC
