State vs Harinder Tyagi And Ors on 30 January, 2024 IN THE COURT OF SH. JOGINDER PRAKASH NAHAR ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE (FTC-01) CENTRAL DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI SC No. 28876/2016 CNR No. DLCT01-012021-2016 FIR No. 866/2014 U/Sec. 308/341/34 IPC P.S. Burari STATE VERSUS HARINDER TYAGI & ORS. (i) SC No. of the case : 28876/2016 (ii) Date of commission of offence : 29.09.2014 (iii) Name, parentage and address : 1) Harinder Tyagi @ Kalwa S/o Sh. Amichand Tyagi R/o Dispensary Wali Gali Jharoda Majra, Burari Delhi Permanent Address: Village Moroni, Post Surajwal PS Salempur, Teh.	FAC
Shikarpur Distt. Bulandshar, U.P. 2) Sunil Tyagi S/o Sh.	FAC
Rishi Dutt Tyagi R/o Dispensary Wali Gali Jharoda Majra, Burari Delhi 3) Nitin Tyagi S/o Sh. Sunil Tyagi R/o Dispensary Wali Gali Jharoda Majra, Burari Delhi 4) Raj Kumar (Proceedings abated) S/o Sh.	FAC
Rishi Dutt Tyagi R/o Dispensary Wali Gali SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 1 of 28 Jharoda Majra, Burari Delhi (iv) Offence complained of : 308/341/34 IPC (v) Plea of the accused : Pleaded not guilty (vi) Final order : Accused no. 1 Harinder Tyagi @ Kalwa, accused no. 2 Sunil Tyagi and accused no. 3 Nitin Tyagi are acquitted for the offence under Section 308 / 341 / 34 IPC. Date of Institution : 05.09.2016 Date of Judgment reserved on : 19.01.2024 Date of Judgment : 30.01.2024 JUDGMENT BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR DECISION :- 1. FIR in the present matter was registered on the complaint of Sh. Sher Singh vide complaint Ex.PW5/A.	FAC
The complainant is doing work of denting and painting vehicles. He has complaint that on 27.09.2014 accused no. 4 Raj Kumar and his cousin brother Sh.	FAC
Dinesh had verbal altercation with them. The accused Raj Kumar had threatened the complainant that the accused Raj Kumar will see the complainant and his wife later in time or his coming as witness in such altercation between accused Raj Kumar and Sh.	FAC
Dinesh. On 29.09.2014 around 8:00 PM when complainant was returning from his home situated nearby then near the shop of Prem accused Raj Kumar and his brother Sunil had met the complainant.	FAC
Accused Raj Kumar had taken out slipper from his foot SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 2 of 28 and hit the complainant on his head. When the complainant had objected to such hitting by such slippers then the accused Sunil started beating complainant with hands and legs.	FAC
In the meanwhile the son of accused Raj Kumar namely Sh. Nitin and the maternal uncle of Sh.	FAC
Nitin had came. Nitin had caught hold of both hands of the complainant and thereafter the remaining three accused namely accused no. 1 Harinder @ Kalwa, accused no. 2 Sunil and accused no. 4 Raj Kumar had started beating the complainant.	FAC
One among accused Sunil and accused Harinder @ Kalwa had hit with vegetable cutting knife on the head of the complainant and blood started coming out. On seeing the blood accused person ran away from the spot.	FAC
The wife of complainant had brought him to the hospital. After investigation chargesheet was filed in the case. FIR Ex.PW1/A was registered in the matter on same day of incident on 29.09.2014.	FAC
Vide DD No. 29 dated 29.09.2014 around 8:05 PM intimation was received at police station. The certificate under Section 65B of Indian Evidence Act proving correctness of recorded FIR is Ex.PW1/C. 2. Charge was framed against all the accused on 22.09.2015 under Section 308 / 34 IPC r/w Section 341 / 34 IPC to which all the accused have pleaded not guilty and have claimed trial.	FAC
Thereafter prosecution had examined prosecution witness from PW1 to PW9. The case against accused no. 4 Raj Kumar has already stood abated vide order dated 05.06.2023.	FAC
Statement of accused was recorded under Section 313 Cr. PC on 04.08.2013. Accused has preferred to lead evidence in defence and DW-1 was examined on 16.10.2023.	FAC
Vide separate statement by ld. Counsel for accused no. 1, 2 and 3 the right to lead further evidence in SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 3 of 28 defence stands closed. 3. PW-8 ASI Sukhpal Singh on the date of offence had received DD No. 29 Ex.PW8/A at police post Jharoda.	FAC
Thereafter PW-8 alongwith Ct. Vijay reached at the spot near Yadav hotel Jharoda, Burari. PW-8 had also received DD no. 33 by way of phone of the same incident. PW-3 and PW-8 had went to Trauma Centre, Civil Lines, Delhi and had collected MLC of complainant Sh.	FAC
Sher Singh which is Ex.PW8/B. The statement of Sh.	FAC
Sher Singh is Ex.PW5/A. The complaint of Sh.	FAC
Sher Singh is exhibited as Ex.PW5/A. PW-8 had made endorsement on it. The Rukka was handed over to Ct.	FAC
Vijay/PW-4 who had received Rukka from HC Sukhpal. PW-1 HC Bala Ram had received Rukka and recorded FIR no. 866/14. Copy of which is Ex.PW1/A(OSR). PW-1 had made endorsement on Rukka vide Ex.PW1/B and had issued certificate under Section 65B of Indian Evidence Act in respect of correct registration of FIR vide Ex.PW1/C. 4. To prove the offence the prosecution is required to establish the ingredients laid down under Section 308 IPC at para No.19 of citation titled Bali v. State Through Government of NCT CRL . A. 36/2021.	FAC
The relevant para 19 is reproduced hereasunder: "19. A bare reading of Section 308 IPC would show that to prove the commission of an offence thereunder, two ingredients are required to be established: SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 4 of 28 (i) that an act was committed, and (ii) that the act was committed with such intention or knowledge and under such circumstances that, if death was caused by the act, the accused would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder." 5. Hence the prosecution has to prove as under: 1. The accused has committed a wrongful act. 2. Such wrong act was carried/committed out with such an intention or knowledge if death was caused by such an act. 3. The act was committed under such circumstances that, if death was caused by the act, the accused would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. 6. To prove the offence under Section 341 IPC the prosecution is required to establish the ingredients laid down under Section 341 IPC are as under: Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Criminal Appeal No.1759 of 2022 (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No.6039 of 2022)in case titled N. S. Madhanagopal & Anr. Vs. K.	STA
Lalitha has held as under: xxxxxxx Section 341 of the IPC talks about punishment for wrongful restraint. Section 341 reads thus: "341.	STA
Punishment for wrongful restraint -Whoever wrongfully restrains any person shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extent to five hundred rupees or with both." The complaint also fails to disclose the necessary ingredients to constitute the offence of wrongful restraint.	STA
In order to attract application of Section 341 which provides for punishment for wrongful restraint, it has to be proved that (i) there was obstruction by the accused; ii) such obstruction prevented a person from proceeding in a SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 5 of 28 direction to which he had a right to proceed; and (iii) the accused caused such obstruction voluntarily. The obstructor must intend or know or would have reason to believe that the means adopted would cause obstruction to the complainant. 7. It was held in case titled Jai Bhagwan Vs. State of Haryana AIR 1999 SC 1083 wherein it was held that to apply Section 34 , apart from the fact that there should be two or more accused, two factors must be established as follows: (i) Common intention (ii) Participation of accused in commission of any offence If common intention is proved but an overt act is attributed to the individual accused then Section 34 will be attracted as essentially it involves vicarious liability but a participation of accused in the crime is proved and common intention is absent then Section 34 cannot be invoked.	STA
It was held in case titled Ramashish Yadav Vs. State of Bihar 1999(8) SCC 555 that Section 34 requires a pre-arrange plan and it pre- supposes prior concert therefore, there must be prior meeting of mind. The prior meeting of mind can be developed at the spur of moment but there must be pre-arrangement or pre-mediated concert.	PRE
It was held in case titled Ram Bilas Singh v. State of Bihar AIR 1989 SC 1593 that in order to convict a person as vicariously liable under Section 34 or Section 149 of IPC then it is not necessary to prove that each and everyone of them had indulged in overt acts. The common intention can be formed in the course of occurrence which was so held in case titled Hariom Vs. State of U.P. (1993) 1 Crimes 254 (SC).	PRE
It was held in case titled Santosh Desai vs. State of Goa (1997) 2 Crimes 666 (Bom) that when an offence is sought to be proved only on circumstantial evidence SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 6 of 28 then the allegation of common intention under Section 34 normally cannot be established in absence of meeting of minds, the overt act of the accused, by their conduct, by using the weapons in their utterance of words. Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in case titled Neeraj Alias Nagar vs. State (NCT of Delhi ) on 14 November, 2019 in Crl. A. 88/2019 has held as under: Common Intention 53. Learned counsel for the accused persons argued that the prosecution failed to prove that the accused persons shared a common intention to commit the alleged offence and hence, they can't be held guilty for the offence punishable under Section 34 IPC. 54. Before delving into the merits of the case, we deem it appropriate to discuss the relevant provisions which are involved in the present case, Section 34 of the IPC reads as under: "34.	PRE
Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention. --When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone." 55. To bring an offence within the ambit of Section 34 IPC, the following factors are necessary to be present there: (1) The criminal act (consisting of a series of acts) should have been done, not by one person, but more than one person. (2) Doing of every such individual act cumulatively resulting in the commission of criminal offence should have been in furtherance of the common intention of all such persons. 56. Therefore, in order to constitute an offence under Section 34 IPC, the accused is to be fastened with liability on the strength of Section 34 IPC, that they should have done some act which has nexus with the offence. Such an act need not be very substantial.	STA
It is enough that the act is only for guarding the scene for facilitating the crime. The distinction between a "common intention" and a "similar intention" which is real and SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 7 of 28 substantial is also not to be lost sight of.	Ratio
The common intention implies a prearranged plan or a plan developed on the spur of the moment. Such common intention which is developed on the spur of the moment is different from the similar intention actuated by a number of persons at the same time. 57. In other words, the act need not necessarily be overt, even if it is only a covert act, it is enough, provided such a covert act is proved to have been done by the co-accused in furtherance of the common intention.	Ratio
Even an omission can, in certain circumstances, amount to an act. So, the act mentioned in Section 34 IPC need not be an overt act, even an illegal omission to do a certain act in a certain situation can amount to an act. 58. The Apex Court in the case of Rambilas Singh v. State of Bihar reported in AIR 1989 SC 1593 the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under: "It is true that in order to convict persons vicariously under S. 34 or S. 149 IPC, it is not necessary to prove that each and every one of them had indulged in overt acts.	PRE
Even so, there must be material to show that the overt act or acts of one or more of the accused was or were done in furtherance of the common intention of all the accused or in prosecution of the common object of he members of the unlawful assembly." (emphasis supplied) 59. The aforesaid judgment was followed by the Apex Court in the case of Suresh &anr v. State of UP reported in 2001 3 SCC 673. The germane portion of the judgment is extracted below: "37. However, in view of the importance of the matter, insofar as the interpretation of Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code is concerned, we have chosen to express our views in the light of consistent legal approach on the subject throughout the period of judicial pronouncements.	PRE
For the applicability of Section 34 to a co-accused, who is proved to have common intention, it is not the requirement of law that he should have actually done something to incur the criminal liability with the aid of this section. It is now well settled that no overt act is necessary to attract the applicability of Section 34 for a co-accused who is otherwise proved to be sharing common intention with the ultimate act done by any one of the accused sharing such intention. 38. Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code recognizes the principle of vicarious liability in criminal jurisprudence. It makes a person liable for action of an offence not committed by him but by another person with whom he shared the common intention.	PRE
It is a SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 8 of 28 rule of evidence and does not create a substantive offence. The section gives statutory recognition to the commonsense principle that if more than two persons intentionally do a thing jointly, it is just the same as if each of them had done it individually.	PRE
There is no gainsaying that a common intention presupposes prior concert, which requires a prearranged plan of the accused participating in an offence. Such preconcert or preplanning may develop on the spot or during the course of commission of the offence but the crucial test is that such plan must precede the act constituting an offence.	PRE
Common intention can be formed previously or in the course of occurrence and on the spur of the moment. The existence of a common intention is a question of fact in each case to be proved mainly as a matter of inference from the circumstances of the case. 39. The dominant feature for attracting Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as "the Code") is the element of participation in absence resulting in the ultimate "criminal act".	PRE
The "act" referred to in the later part of Section 34 means the ultimate criminal act with which the accused is charged of sharing the common intention. The accused is, therefore, made responsible for the ultimate criminal act done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all.	PRE
The section does not envisage the separate act by all the accused persons for becoming responsible for the ultimate criminal act. If such an interpretation is accepted, the purpose of Section 34 shall be rendered infructuous. 60. Keeping in view the facts of the present case and applying the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court, it is established that common intention necessitates prior concert which requires a prearranged plan, but such preconcert may develop on the spur of the moment and will make the accused persons responsible for the ultimate criminal act done by several persons.	PRE
Further, on the basis of evidence borne out from the previous part of the judgment, it is substantiated that all the accused persons in furtherance of their common intention were actively involved in the commission of the alleged offence. 8. PW-5 had deposed that on 29.09.2014 at about 8:00 PM when he was returning to his shop and going towards his house then he had reached in front of shop of Prem where accused Raj Kumar Tyagi was present. When PW-5 Sh.	FAC
Sher Singh had crossed Raj Kumar Tyagi then SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 9 of 28 Raj Kumar had beaten him with slipper on his head. When PW-5 had objected then accused Sunil Tyagi had also reached there and threatened to kill PW-5.	FAC
Thereafter accused Raj Kumar and Sunil started beating PW-5 with fist and blow. In the meanwhile accused Nitin and Kalwa also reached there.	FAC
From the above deposition it has come on record that when the quarrel started between them i.e. accused Raj Kumar Tyagi started beating PW-5 with slipper then remaining three accused were not present there. There is time of interval in coming of accused Sunil and later coming of accused Nitin and Kalwa @ Harinder at the spot.	FAC
Hence it cannot be said that there is prior meeting of mind. The accused Sunil had threatened to kill whereas accused Raj Kumar was beating by slipper on PW-5 and later accused Nitin and Kalwa had joined with fist and blows which shows that there was no prior meeting of mind to beat PW- 5 in such a manner.	Ratio
The quarrel had started suddenly with accused Raj Kumar in which other accused had joined later. PW-5 had deposed that accused Nitin had caught hold of his hand and other accused had attacked on his head with knife due to which blood started coming out from his head. As per PW-5 he had suffered injury by knife.	FAC
At the outset it is noted that knife is not recovered in the present matter during investigation. Neither the slipper is recovered with which accused Raj Kumar had hit the complainant. PW-5 during his deposition before the Court has improved upon his statement under Section 161 Cr. PC which is Ex.PW3/P1 in that accused Kalwa @ Harinder had lifted a knife from Yadav Hotel with threat to kill PW-5 whereas in his depositing before the Court this threat was given by accused Sunil Tyagi and not by Harinder Tyagi @ Kalwa.	FAC
Further, PW-5 had omitted to depose that the knife was allegedly lifted by the accused from Yadav hotel. There is no recovery of SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 10 of 28 knife.	FAC
Prosecution has not made any person from Yadav hotel as witness in the case. The accused has bought in defence the owner of Yadav Dhaba at Tyagi market as DW-1 whereas DW-1 had deposed that the complainant/PW-5 Sh/ Sher Singh came at the spot holding his head and started quarreling with the accused Raj Kumar.	FAC
According to DW-1, PW- 5 had started the quarrel with accused Raj Kumar Tyagi by pushing his head and stomach on which accused Raj Kumar Tyagi had fallen down on the pavement. It is further deposed that accused no. 1 Harinder, accused no. 2 Sunil and accused no. 3 Nitin were not present at the spot.	FAC
Hence plea of alibi is taken by the accused. 9. It is settled rule of law that the burden of proof to establish plea of alibi is on the accused. To establish such plea the accused has to prove that where he was present.	Ratio
Accused is not required to prove that where he was not present. In the present case by such deposition of DW-1 the accused is trying to prove that accused no. 1 Harinder, accused no. 2 Sunil and accused no. 3 Nitin were not present at the spot.	ARG
What in fact is required to be proved by the accused that at what spot he was present. No such proof is led by the accused in absence of which it is held that accused has failed to prove plea of alibi raised by them namely accused no. 1 to 3. Hence plea of alibi as raised by the above accused stands rejected as unproved.	Ratio
The relevant citations as to proof of plea of alibi are reproduced hereasunder: Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled Pappu Tiwary vs. State of Jharkhand on 31 January, 2022 in Criminal Appeal No.1492 of 2021 has held as under: 13) and Chandraman Singh (PW-18) and their testimonies have broadly been consistent, which assign the role to Law Tiwari. The endeavour to apprehend him on 07.03.2000 was not successful as SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 11 of 28 he was found absconding by the IO on six different occasions when his premises were visited. He was only subsequently arrested and taken on remand on 04.04.2000.	PRE
The contention of learned counsel for the State was that neither the advise of Dr. M.P. Singh nor the x- ray having been produced, and Dr. M.P.	ARG
Singh not having been produced as a defence witness or summoned, there was not a piece of paper evidencing the admission and treatment of Law Tiwari in the hospital which could be produced in support of his plea of alibi. He also drew our attention to the fardbeyan to indicate that Law Tiwari and other accused had demanded a motorcycle of the deceased to go to Meral in connection with a case, which was declined.	ARG
Learned counsel for the State also submitted that the conduct of Law Tiwari even during custody was not proper as he had extended a threat to the informant and the informant had suffered fire arm injury on 13.06.2001. Consequently, case No.107/2001 was registered at the Garhwa Police Station.	ARG
In the end it was contended that there was no attempt made to distinguish the appellant's role from that of Ajay Pal and the appeal of Ajay Pal being dismissed, the only aspect which had to be examined was whether the concurrent findings of the two courts below rejecting the plea of alibi was required to be interfered with by this Court when the burden lay heavy on the appellant as when such a plea is raised the accused must discharge that burden. We may refer to the judicial view in this behalf in Vijay Pal v. State (Government of NCT of Delhi )1 wherein this Court held that: " 27. In our considered opinion, when the trial court as well as the High Court have disbelieved the plea of alibi which is a concurrent finding of fact, there is no warrant to dislodge the same.	ARG
The evidence that has been adduced by the accused to prove the plea of alibi is sketchy and in fact foes not stand to reason. It is not a case where the accused has proven with absolute certainty so as to exclude the possibility of his presence at the place of occurrence.	PRE
The evidence adduced by the accused is not of such quality that the Court would entertain a reasonable doubt. The burden on the accused is rather heavy and he is required to establish the plea of alibi with certitude."	PRE
In Jitender Kumar v. State of Haryana2 this Court stated that: "71. .... The burden of establishing the plea of alibi lay upon the appellants and the appellants have failed to bring on record any such evidence which would, even by reasonable probability, establish their plea of alibi.	PRE
The plea of alibi in fact is required to be proved with certainty so as to completely exclude the possibility of the presence of the accused at the place of occurrence and in the house which was the home of their relatives." SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 12 of 28 In case titled Tomaso Bruno & Anr vs State of U.P on 20 January, 2015 Equivalent citations: 2015 CRI. L. J. 1690, 2015 (7) SCC 178, AIR 2015 SC (SUPP) 412 it was laid down as under: 29. The High Court held that even though the appellants alleged that the footage of CCTV is being concealed by the prosecution for the reasons best known to the prosecution, the accused did not invoke Section 233 Cr.P.C. and they did not make any application for production of CCTV camera footage.	RLC
The High Court further observed that the accused were not able to discredit the testimony of PW-1, PW-12 and PW-13 qua there being no relevant material in the CCTV camera footage. Notwithstanding the fact that the burden lies upon the accused to establish the defence plea of alibi in the facts and circumstances of the case, in our view, prosecution in possession of the best evidence- CCTV footage ought to have produced the same.	RLC
In our considered view, it is a fit case to draw an adverse inference against the prosecution under Section 114 (g) of the Evidence Act that the prosecution withheld the same as it would be unfavourable to them had it been produced. In case titled Dudh Nath Pandey vs The State of U.P on 11 February, 1981 Equivalent citations: 1981 AIR 911, 1981 SCR (2) 771, AIR 1981 SUPREME COURT 911 it was laid down as under: Counsel for the appellant pressed hard upon us that the defence evidence establishes the alibi of the appellant.	PRE
We think not. The evidence led by the appellant to show that, at the relevant time, he was on duty at his usual place of work at Naini has a certain amount of plausibility but that is about all.	PRE
The High Court and the Sessions Court have pointed out many a reason why that evidence cannot be accepted as true. The appellant's colleagues at the Indian Telephone Industries made a brave bid to save his life by giving evidence suggesting that he was at his desk at or about the time when the murder took place and further, that he was arrested from within the factory.	PRE
We do not want to attribute motives to them merely because they were examined by the defence. Defence witnesses are entitled to equal treatment with those of the prosecution.	PRE
And, Courts ought to overcome their traditional, instinctive disbelief in defence witnesses. Quite often, they tell lies but so do the prosecution witnesses.	PRE
Granting that D. Ws. 1 to 5 are right, their evidence, particularly in the light of the evidence of the two Court witnesses, is insufficient to prove that the appellant could not have been present near the Hathi Park at about 9-00 A.M. when the murder of Pappoo was committed.	PRE
The plea of alibi postulates the physical impossibility of the presence of the SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 13 of 28 accused at the scene of offence by reason of his presence at another place. The plea can therefore succeed only if it is shown that the accused was so far away at the relevant time that he could not be present at the place where the crime was committed.	PRE
The evidence of the defence witnesses, accepting it at its face value, is consistent with the appellant's presence at the Naini factory at 8-30 A.M. and at the scene of offence at 9.00 A.M. So short is the distance between the two points.	PRE
The workers punch their cards when they enter the factory but when they leave the factory, they do not have to punch the time of their exit. The appellant, in all probability, went to the factory at the appointed hour, left it immediately and went in search of his prey.	PRE
He knew when, precisely, Pappoo would return after dropping Ranjana at the school. The appellant appears to have attempted to go back to his work but that involved the risk of the time of his re- entry being punched again.	PRE
That is how he was arrested at about 2- 30 P.M. while he was loitering near the pan-shop in front of the factory. There is no truth in the claim that he was arrested from inside the factory. 10. It is further noted that in his statement under Section 161 Cr. PC Ex.PW3/P1 dated 03.10.2014 the complainant has not disclosed to the police that there was any prior altercation between accused Raj Kumar and his brother Dinesh in which complainant was witness on 27.09.2014.	PRE
There was a dispute between accused Raj Kumar and his brother Dinesh in which the complainant Sh. Sher Singh had interferred as witness.	PRE
In the entire deposition of the complainant PW-5 such complaint between accused Raj Kumar and his brother Dinesh Tyagi has not been proved. The complaint Ex.PW5/A is dated 29.09.2014.	PRE
The PW-5 mentions about this earlier complaint in his examination-in-chief that he had made such a complaint to the police. However, no such complaint is proved on record.	PRE
The nature of dispute between accused Raj Kumar and his brother Dinesh is also not proved. In cross-examination PW-5 has improved in his examination-in-chief that he did not make any complaint to any authority regarding the incident dated 27.09.2014.	PRE
With such SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 14 of 28 improvement it cannot be said that the PW-5 is deposing truthfully. In that, at some point he states that he had given a complaint to the police and at other point he states that he has not given any complaint to any authority.	PRE
The said complaint would be one piece of circumstantial evidence to establish motive of such altercation between accused and the complainant. In absence of direct evidence motive forms one piece in the chain of circumstance when there is absence of eye witnesses of credibility and direct evidence.	PRE
The relevant citation in this regard is case titled Neeraj @ Nagar vs. State (NCT of Delhi ) in Crl. A. 88/2019 dated 14.11.2019. The relevant para no. 50, 51 and 52 of above citation are reproduced hereasunder: 50. There is no such principle or rule of law that where the prosecution fails to prove the motive for commission of the crime, it must necessarily result in acquittal of the accused.	PRE
Our view is fortified by the law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sardul Singh v. State of Haryana reported in AIR 2002 SC 3462 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the motive is not always capable of precise proof, if proved, may only lend additional support to strengthen the probability of commission of the offence by the accused person, but the absence of proof does not ipso facto warrant an acquittal. 51. While dealing with a similar issue, the Hon'ble Apex Court in a recent judgment titled as Khurshid Ahmed Vs State of Jammu And Kashmir reported in 2018 7 SCC 429, has held that the motive is a double-edged weapon and the same loses its importance when there are direct and reliable evidence available on record. Relevant part from the aforesaid judgment is extracted below: "18.	PRE
Another argument advanced is that there was no motive to commit the offence and in the absence of strong motive, the appellant cannot be held guilty under Section 302 IPC. In the present case, motive can be traced from the evidences produced by the prosecution with regard to the prior incident that took place between the deceased and accused in connection with payment of money over a transaction where the accused stood as a guarantor. Because of the earlier scuffle, the subsequent incident has occurred in which the accused SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 15 of 28 hit the deceased with an iron rod due to which the deceased lost his life.	PRE
It is appropriate to observe that in Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Edn., with regard to "motive", it is stated that "the prosecution may prove, but it is not bound to prove the motive for a crime". "Motive" is an emotion which compels the person to do a particular act. But in all the cases, it will be very difficult for the prosecution to prove the real motive.	PRE
Motive is a double-edged weapon when there is a direct and reliable evidence available on record, motive loses its importance. In a case of circumstantial evidence, motive assumes greater importance than in the case of direct evidence.	PRE
In a case of direct and compelling evidence, even assuming that no motive is attributed, still the prosecution version has to be examined. 19. As regards to the importance of existence of motive in a criminal case, here it is worthwhile to look at the ratio laid down by this Court in Shivaji Genu Mohite v. State of Maharashtra [Shivaji Genu Mohite v. State of Maharashtra, (1973) 3 SCC 219 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 214 : AIR 1973 SC 55] : (SCC pp. 224-25, para 12) "12. ... In case the prosecution is not able to discover an impelling motive, that could not reflect upon the credibility of a witness proved to be a reliable eyewitness.	PRE
Evidence as to motive would, no doubt, go a long way in cases wholly dependent on circumstantial evidence. Such evidence would form one of the links in the chain of circumstantial evidence in such a case.	PRE
But that would not be so in cases where there are eyewitnesses of credibility, though even in such cases if a motive is properly proved, such proof would strengthen the prosecution case and fortify the court in its ultimate conclusion. But that does not mean that if a motive is not established the evidence of an eyewitness is rendered untrustworthy."	PRE
X X X 28. In view of the above discussion, we are of the considered view that the direct oral evidence available on record coupled with the medical evidence, points at the guilt of the accused and not proving the motive for commission of the offence lost its significance in the facts of the case." 52. Herein it is relevant to highlight that the present case is based on direct evidence and proof of motive will be an additional corroborative piece of evidence, but keeping in mind the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court, the inability of the prosecution to establish motive is not always fatal to the case of prosecution and does not render any benefit to the accused persons. 11. If there was any such dispute between accused Raj Kumar and SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 16 of 28 his brother Dinesh then the prosecution should have proved such dispute by direct evidence of Sh. Dinesh which is not so proved by the prosecution.	PRE
In the alleged dispute PW-5 had also went to police station on 27.09.2014 and stated true facts to the police due to which accused Raj Kumar had threatened him. Therefore, such threat must have been proved on record.	PRE
The place of threat and the person who was present during such threat is not disclosed not proved on record. PW-5 had given statement to police in favour of Sh. Dinesh Tyagi then he should have produced Sh.	Ratio
Dinesh Tyagi as witness in this regard which is not done in the present case. Hence PW-5 has failed to prove motive for his beating by accused Raj Kumar on 29.09.2014.	Ratio
The direct evidence is found contradictory as to which of the accused had hit with knife on the head of PW-5. It is deposed by PW-5 in examination-in-chief that accused Kalwa @ Harinder or other accused person had attacked upon him on his head with knife.	Ratio
With such statement it appears PW-5 himself does not know that which of the accused had hit him with knife. In complaint Ex.PW5/A it is also mentioned by complainant PW-5 that accused Sunil or accused Kalwa one among them had hit him on his head with knife.	Ratio
In statement under Section 161 Cr. PC it is stated by PW-5 that accused Kalwa @ Harinder had lifted knife from Yadav hotel and he had hit him with this knife. Hence the PW-5 has improved on his statement by incorporating the word other accused in his deposition that who had hit him with knife on his head. DW-1 from Yadav hotel though came in evidence but there is no question to him by the prosecution that knife was lifted from his Dhaba.	Ratio
Hence the prosecution neither proved lifting of knife from the shop of Yadav Dhaba in its own evidence nor there is any cross-examination in this respect of DW-1 though DW-1 has SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 17 of 28 deposed that he has running the business in the name and style of Yadav Dhaba at Tyagi market. The knife is also not recovered during investigation nor the doctor has been examined by the prosecution to prove the nature of injury if it can be caused by the knife and of what nature.	Ratio
Hence it cannot be said that the injury on the head of PW-5 was caused by knife. PW-6 Ms. Rashmi Tyagi has deposed that accused Harinder Tyagi @ Kalwa had hit PW-5 on the head with knife and she had seen it. It is deposed by PW-6 that accused are her relative.	Ratio
It is deposed that there was quarrel with accused person on 27.09.2014 and which was reported to the police and matter was settled. It is deposed by PW-6 that she had not made any call at 100 number. PW-6 had informed PW-7 about beating of PW-5. PW-7 had seen knife in the hand of accused Kalwa @ Harinder and PW-5 was bleeding from his head due to injury. PW-7 had made a call at 100 number to the police.	Ratio
In her statement under Section 161 Cr. PC PW-7 has deposed that she was informed by PW-6 about the beating of her husband and she was also informed that blood was coming out from the head of her husband. Hence PW-7 has not witnessed to the fact that which of the accused had hit PW-5 with knife as she had reached at the spot later on. PW-6 had allegedly witness the said hitting of knife by Harinder Tyagi @ Kalwa on the head of PW-5.	Ratio
It is admitted by PW-6 that the accused are her relatives and they had quarrel with accused person on 27.09.2014 regarding which a complaint to the police was also made and matter was settled. This fact was not disclosed by PW-6 in her statement under Section 161 Cr. PC and when she already had dispute and altercation with the accused person two days back then she had become interested witness.	Ratio
Her testimony requires close scrutiny. It has also come on SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 18 of 28 record that PW-5 had stated before police in favour of husband of PW-6 on the alleged dispute dated 27.09.2014. PW-3 had deposed that PW-5 came and pulled Raj Kumar from pavement on the road on which quarrel had started between them.	Ratio
Though PW-3 was declared hostile by the prosecution. It is deposed by PW-3 as wrong to suggest that accused Kalwa had lifted knife from Yadav hotel and thereafter he hit upon head of PW-5. 11.2 It was held in case titled Sunil Kumar v. N.C.T. of Delhi (1998) 8 SCC 557; 1998 SCC (Cri) 1522. The relevant para in this regard is reproduced hereasunder: 3. The dispute is between the tenants and the landlords of a premises in Delhi.	Ratio
On 27-9-1992, there was a clash between the two sides. Both sides allegedly were injured.	Ratio
The landlords are the accused in the instant case. Sunil Kumar is the victim of the crime.	Ratio
After the matter was reported to the police, his medico-legal examination was conducted by the doctor-in-charge, who after enumerating the injuries opined them to be grievous. Dr. Dabbas, whom we have summoned today to explain the medico-legal report, was the doctor who supervised and endorsed the report. According to him, the injuries have been termed grievous because two of them were lacerated wounds and one was a haematoma and since the blows were aimed at the head, they had endangered life.	Ratio
The learned Additional Sessions Judge to whom the case was committed had framed charges against the respondents under Sections 308 / 34 IPC, the gravamen of the charge being that an attempt to cause culpable homicide not amounting to murder had been made. Whether the injury was grievous or simple deserved a back seat in face of the charge under Sections 308 / 34 IPC. Yet the High Court when approached in its revisional power under Section 439 of the CrPC quashed the charge in finding room in the medico- legal report to opine that the injuries were simple.	Ratio
The High Court observed as follows: "I have perused the FIR as well as the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 of the Criminal Procedure Code by the police. No person including the complainant has made any allegation in their statements that injuries were inflicted by the SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 19 of 28 petitioners with an intention to cause their death.	Ratio
As already mentioned above, in order to constitute an offence under Section 308, not only it should be proved that the act was committed by the accused but it was committed with the intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder and that offence was committed under such circumstances if the accused by that act had caused death he would have been guilty of culpable homicide. Therefore, the most important circumstance in a case under Section 308 would be that an act should have been committed with intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder.	Ratio
The injuries sustained by the complainant are not such that could in any manner result in the death of the injured persons. The injuries were caused by a blunt object and it was one足and足a足half足inch lacerated wound in the scalp.	Ratio
The doctor who examined the complainant had opined that there was no evidence of head injuries and it did not even require hospitalisation and he was asked to attend the OPD the next date. The word 'grievous' against the injuries has been written and had not given any opinion about his alleged head injuries.	Ratio
Merely because an injury has been found on the head, it cannot be said that such an injury was caused with the intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The evidence and circumstances of the case otherwise show that there was no intention or knowledge on the part of the accused to cause such injuries which would have resulted in the death of the complainant as a result of which they would have been guilty of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder.	Ratio
The fact that the petitioners have also been injured and a case under Section 324 IPC has been registered against the complainant clearly shows that it was a scuffle between two parties without any intention on either side to cause injuries which might result in the death of the accused. The material before the Additional Sessions Judge, in my view, was not such which could give rise to grave suspicion against the petitioners of their having the intention or knowledge to cause such an injury that had the death been caused, they would have been guilty of culpable homicide.	Ratio
For the foregoing reasons, I am of the considered opinion that the petitioners could not have been charged for an offence punishable under Sections 308 / 34 IPC." 4. The view taken by the High Court is obviously erroneous because offence punishable under Section 308 IPC postulates SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 20 of 28 doing of an act with such intention or knowledge and under such circumstances that if one by that act caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. An attempt of that nature may actually result in hurt or may not.	Ratio
It is the attempt to commit culpable homicide which is punishable under Section 308 IPC whereas punishment for simple hurts can be meted out under Sections 323 and 324 and for grievous hurts under Sections 325 and 326 IPC. Qualitatively, these offences are different. The High Court was thus not well advised to take the view as afore-extracted to bring down the offence to be under Sections 323 / 34 IPC and then in turn to hold that since that offence was investigated by the police without permission of the magistrate, the proceedings under that provision be quashed.	Ratio
For the view afore-taken as to the commission of the offence under Sections 308 / 34 IPC, it is not necessary to dwell on the correctness of the second part of the order relating to quashing of proceedings under Sections 323 / 34 IPC. Thus, the entire order of the High Court deserves to be and is hereby quashed, restoring the status quo ante of the trial remaining with the Additional Sessions Judge to proceed in accordance with law. 11.3 It was held in citation referred above under Section 308 IPC the most important circumstance is that act is committed with intention and knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder. When the doctor has not given any opinion about the alleged injuries on head then merely because a injury has been found on the head, it cannot be said that such an injury was caused with the intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide.	Ratio
It was held in case titled 1957 Allahabad LJ 308 (312) that where a number of accused were charged under Section 308 r/w Section 34 of IPC then in the event common intention is not proved and it is not proved that who has inflicted the fatal injury. Then in those circumstance though it was held that no one could be convicted under Section 308 IPC or even under Section 325 IPC. It was also held in case titled 2008 Crl. LJ (Rajasthan) 299 that the opinion of doctor that the injury not capable of SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 21 of 28 endangering life then no case is made out against the accused for the offence under Section 308 IPC. Hence in absence of medical opinion it cannot be said that accused has inflicted such kind of injuries which could have put life of victim in danger.	PRE
It is also settled law that when it cannot be ascertained nor it is proved on record or that there is doubt regarding who had actually hit the fatal blow endangering life of the victim then none of the accused can be convicted and all of them are liable to be acquitted in respect of said offence. Another fact to be noted is that in the MLC Ex.PW8/B three separate injuries are reported on the head of PW-5 whereas the PW-5 had deposed that he was hit only once with the knife.	PRE
How the other two injuries have happened with PW-5 must be explained by the prosecution. In absence of explanation of all the injuries on the head it cannot be said that such injuries were occurred in the said altercation on 29.09.2017. 12.1 The IO has failed to recover the alleged knife used during the offence nor any blood sample either from the clothes of PW-5 or from the spot was collected.	PRE
In case titled State of Uttarakhand vs. Jairnail Singh (2018) 1 SCC 128 dated 13.11.2017 wherein it is held at para no. 17 that immediately after the incident when in the application made to Chief Medical Superintendent the name of accused is not mentioned despite parties knowing each other for about last 3-4 years beforehand creates doubt in the involvement of the accused. It was further held at para no. 19 that when blood stained shirt and soil are not sent for forensic examination then it also creates doubt in the case of prosecution.	PRE
In the present case also in the MLC Ex.PW8/B the injured Sher Singh/PW-5 has not disclosed to the doctor Sh. J.K. Basu/CMO on his SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 22 of 28 arrival at 9:10 PM on 29.09.2014 that which of the accused had caused physical assault on him.	PRE
The name of the weapon is also not mentioned if it was a vegetable cutting knife. The PW-5 is oriented and he was fit for statement at 10:30 PM on 29.09.2014.	PRE
All the accused were before hand known to the injured/PW-5 despite which he did not disclosed the name of any of the accused before the CMO nor he has disclosed the nature of weapon of offence and therefore this creates doubt in the manner in which the dispute had started or that injury was caused upon PW-5. The relevant para of citation above are reproduced hereasunder: 17) In other words, in our view, the reasoning and the conclusion of the High Court in acquitting the respondent of the charges under Section 307 IPC and Section 25 (1-A) appears to be just and proper as set out below and to which we concur and hence it does not call for any interference by this Court. 18) First, the parties involved in the case namely, the victim, his brother, who was one of the eye-witnesses with other two eye-witnesses and the accused were known to each other then why the Complainant-brother of victim in his application (Ex- P-A) made immediately after the incident to the Chief Medical Superintendent, Pilibhit did not mention the name of the accused and instead mentioned therein "some sardars". 19) Second, according to the prosecution, the weapon used in commission of offence was recovered from the pocket of the accused the next day, it looked improbable as to why would the accused keep the pistol all along in his pocket after the incident for such a long time and roam all over. 12.2 The MLC of PW-5 is Ex.PW8/B.	PRE
The nature of injury was recorded as simple. The examination has shown that there was incised wound on the vertex of skull of 6cm.	PRE
There were other two injuries of incised wound over right parieto temporal region of skull and the nature of injury would be caused by sharp edge weapon by blunt type of object. SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 23 of 28 However, PW-8 could not prove such injury without examination of doctor and thereafter cross-examination of said doctor. Hence mere filing of document Ex.PW8/B about examination of PW-5 does not prove the nature of injury or that what was the nature of weapon by which such injury was caused and therefore it cannot be said that this injury was caused by a vegetable cutting knife.	PRE
Even vegetable cutting knife are of different shapes, size and sharpness. The intensity of the injury is also not proved in absence of examination of doctor and its consequent cross- examination.	FAC
The testimony of PW-7 as to which of the accused had caused injury is doubtful as he himself is not sure that which of the accused had caused such injury. The PW-7 has deposed that her husband was working at the shop of Dinesh Tyagi as labour and therefore she is also an interested witness. PW-6 has not disclosed her previous quarrel with the accused person dated 27.09.2014 in her statement under Section 161 Cr. PC.	FAC
Further, PW-6 has not made any call to the police person though the police person were about 300 mtrs. away at a distance of 10 minutes reach which is so deposed by PW-2. The PW-6 has deposed contrary to PW-2 by claiming that police post is far away and there is no police post near the spot so she could not tell the distance of police post from the spot. PW-6 has also not deposed regarding nature of quarrel with the accused dated 27.09.2014 nor she had proved her complaint if any is made to the police regarding the said quarrel despite claiming that she had made the complaint to the police regarding the quarrel and further claimed that such dispute was settled though no such settlement is proved on record. 13. The PW-5 did not name the accused person in MLC despite SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 24 of 28 knowing them prior to the incident. PW-5 also could not depose the name of public person who were present at the time of incident.	FAC
Whereas PW-6 Ms. Rashmi Tyagi has claimed that she was witness to the incident. PW-6 was not present at the spot of the incident since very beginning and she has deposed that when she was coming back from Subzi Mandi then four accused were beating PW-5. Hence there is no eye witness to the incident except PW-3, PW-5 and DW-1 to depose in the manner in which the dispute had started between the parties. PW-3 is declared hostile by the prosecution and it is deposed by PW-3 that first PW-5 came at the spot and he had thrown Raj Kumar on the pavement on the road and thereafter quarrel had started between them. PW-5 has deposed that accused Raj Kumar had stopped him while he was returning home and started beating him with slippers. Whereas DW-1 has deposed that accused Raj Kumar was standing at the shop of Prem when PW-5 came and pushed Raj Kumar Tyagi on head and stomach on which accused Raj Kumar had fallen down on the pavement.	FAC
It is admitted by PW-5 that at the time of incident on 29.09.2014 accused Raj Kumar was standing at the shop of Prem. The suggestion is denied that PW-5 had went to spot and started giving beating to accused Raj Kumar in order to falsely implicate him.	FAC
However the cause of beginning of the quarrel is claimed by PW-5 that he has deposed in favour of Sh. Dinesh who is husband of PW-6.	FAC
However PW-6 has deposed that matter has already been settled between the parties at police station. Had there been such settlement then no cause would have survived between the parties so that accused Raj Kumar Tyagi would have entered into quarrel with PW-5.	Ratio
Hence beginning of dispute has started in the matter when the quarrel had first started between the parties. It has become doubtful that whether SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 25 of 28 PW-5 had started the quarrel or it is the accused Raj Kumar Tyagi who had started the quarrel.	FAC
The burden of proof to prove that manner in which quarrel has started is on the prosecution. Since there was prior dispute between the parties on 27.09.2014 record of which was available with the prosecution and the same is not produced on record shows that some true facts are not brought by the prosecution on record which would throw better light on the facts of the case.	ARG
It would also have shown that whether there is any reason with accused Raj Kumar on 29.09.2014 to start a quarrel with PW-5. The prosecution has not discharged its burden about the manner in which the quarrel had started between the parties and benefit of which needs to be extended to the accused.	ARG
Accused therefore cannot be convicted of the charge offence against them under Section 308 / 341 / 34 IPC in view of citation referred hereasunder: It was held in case titled Harpreet vs. Kewal Thukral and Ors. in CRM-A No. 1709-MA of 2014 (O&M) from Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana at relevant page no. 13 which is reproduced hereasunder: Similarly, in the present case also, the trial Court has recorded a finding that on appreciation of statements of witnesses has held that CW2 - Surinder Singh, husband of the complainant is interested witnesses and CW3 who is stated to be an eye-witness is, in fact, is uncle of the complainant and during deposition has given the date and time of the incident, which he had noted on his hand and thus he seems to be a tutored witness. The trial Court further recorded a finding that the incident took place on 28.07.2008 and the MLR was got conducted on 29.07.2008 and on the date of incident or subsequently, the complainant never approached the police.	RLC
While acquitting the respondents/accused persons, the trial Court has also taken notice of the fact that the FIR case against the complaint side is also pending and on the appreciation of the prosecution evidence, in this case also, it could not be proved as to which party was aggressor or victim and SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 26 of 28 was exercising its right of self-defence. On perusal of the prosecution evidence also, a copy submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant, it is apparent that the instant complaint was also filed on 18.08.2008 relating to an incident of 28.07.2008 and in the intervening period, no complaint was lodged with the police.	RLC
The complainant could not gave any explanation as to why she was not medico legally examined on the same day when she suffered the injuries and CW3, the alleged eye- witness namely Mukhtiar Singh, has stated that he has written the date and time of incident on his hand while deposing before the Court and, therefore, possibility cannot be ruled out that this witness is a tutored witness. Moreover, this witness has admitted that he is uncle of the complainant and, therefore, he is an interested witness.	ARG
From a perusal of both the judgments i.e. the judgment passed in FIR case (Annexure A3) as well as the impugned judgment, the trial Court has rightly recorded a finding that though, the incident has taken place on 28.07.2008, however, its genesis is disputed. There are many infirmities and contradictions in the statement of witnesses and, therefore, the trial Court has rightly held that it could not be proved as to which party was aggressor or the victim which acted in self-defence.	RLC
The incident took place with regard to a Naali (waste water outlet) and both the parties being neighbourers seems to have taken up a fight on sudden provocation. Counsel for the appellant as well as counsel for the respondents has further stated that subsequent to this incident dated 28.07.2008, no further incident has taken place between the parties and for the last about 11 years, they are living peacefully.	FAC
This is yet another fact to be noticed that the incident has taken place due to sudden provocation and, thereafter, the parties being neighbourers, are residing peacefully. In view of above, I find that the trial Court has rightly recorded a finding that in the version as well as in the cross-version, the complainants could not prove as to which party was aggressor or the victim which acted in self-defence, therefore, finding no merit/infirmity in the same, the appeal is dismissed. 14. Hence it is found that prosecution has failed to prove that which party in the case was aggressor.	ARG
The oral averments of PW-5 are rebutted SC No. 28876/2016 FIR No. 866/2014 State Vs. Harinder Tyagi & Ors. Page 27 of 28 by oral averments of PW-3 and DW-1 with further suggestion to PW-5 by way of oral rebuttal in cross-examination. Hence benefit of doubt is extended to all the accused that the manner in which the dispute has started between the parties and who were the aggressors. Hence accused person are acquitted of the offence charged against them and it is held that prosecution has failed to prove the charge levelled against the accused person discussed above.	RPC
Accordingly, accused namely Harinder Tyagi @ Kalwa, Sunil Tyagi and Nitin Tyagi stands acquitted. Their earlier personal bond are cancelled and surety are discharged and documents, if any, be returned to the surety and endorsement on security documents is allowed to be de-endorsed.	RPC
In terms of Section 437A Cr. PC, accused have furnished their bail bonds as directed which will be in force for period of six months from the date of this judgment. Case property be confiscated to the State.	RPC
File be consigned to the Record Room. Announced in the open Court on 30.01.2024. JOGINDER Digitally signed by JOGINDER PRAKASH NAHAR PRAKASH Date: 2024.01.30 16:14:59 NAHAR +0530 (JOGINDER PRAKASH NAHAR) ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE (FTC-01) CENTRAL/TIS HAZARI COURT DELHI SC No. 28876/2016	RPC
