State vs Pankaj Kumar on 7 May, 2024 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others THE COURT OF SH. GAUTAM MANAN ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE- 09 WEST, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI In the matter of: S. C. No. 57970/16 CNR No. DLWT01-005205-2016 FIR No. 04/2016 Police Station Kirti Nagar Under Section U/s 323/308/34 IPC State Versus 1. Pankaj Kumar S/o Sh. Ram Dayal Sahani R/o Jhuggi No. W-9B/234, Chuuna Bhatti, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi 2. Parmeshwar S/o.	FAC
Radhey Shyam R/o. Jhuggi No. B-311, Chuna Bhatti, Kirti Nagar, Delhi. 3. Parveen Both S/o Sh.	FAC
Radhey Shyam Both Resident of: Jhuggi No. B-311 Chuuna Bhatti, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi 4. Ram Naresh S/o Sh. Ravinder R/o Jhuggi No. B-224 Chuuna Bhatti, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi ...	FAC
Accused Persons Judgment 1 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others Date of institution 04.08.2016 Judgment reserved on 18.04.2024 Judgment Pronounced on 07.05.2024 Decision Acquitted JUDGMENT 1. Accused persons are facing trial in this case on allegations of assaulting and causing simple hurt to injured Bideo Shah (PW1). Ramu (PW2) and Monu (PW4) with intention that if, they caused their death then accused persons would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.	FAC
Brief Facts 2. Briefly stated the case of prosecution is that on 04.01.2016, vide DD No. 33A (Ex PW3/A), Sub-Inspector Amrit Lal, (since deceased) along with Ct Sanjeet (PW7) reached at spot and found that injured were taken to Hospital in PCR van. IO reached there and obtained MLC of injured Bideo Shah and recorded his statement. English translation of statement of complainant Bideo Shah reads as under: - ..... I live at the above address and run a scrap shop.	FAC
Today on 3/01/16, I woke up around 6 in the morning and saw that there was dirt lying in front of my scrap shop, so I asked Pankaj during the day. S/o Ram Dayal, Praveen S/o Radheshyam, Ram Naresh S/o Ravindra and Parmeshwar S/o Radheshyam, we had an argument about why you have littered here, and I also went to my home. And these four Judgment 2 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others mentioned above had gone to their homes.	FAC
Today, on 03.01.2016 at around 6 pm,, when I was standing outside my scrap shop, Pankaj, Praveen came with a stick in their hands and started abusing me, saying, you bastards are very proud of themselves so they started beating me with sticks and hearing the noise, my sons Ram and Monu also came to save me, then Ram Naresh and Parmeshwar also came there and they took the sticks from the hands of Pankaj and Praveen. The boys also beat me with sticks on my head, hands and other body, I also fought them and all of them attacked me and my sons with sticks and hurt me fatally. I know all of them.	FAC
Legal action should be taken against him.. 3. On the basis of statement of complainant and medical record of complainant and other injured persons Ramu and Monu, FIR under Section 323 / 308 / 34 IPC was registered. During investigations, statements of other witnesses were recorded, site plan of place of occurrence was prepared.	FAC
Medical opinion in respect of injuries to complainant was taken. On completion of investigation, charge-sheet was filed against accused persons.	FAC
Charge 4. On 21.04.2017 charge for the offence punishable under Section 308 / 323 / 34 IPC was framed against accused persons. They pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.	FAC
Prosecution Evidence 5. Prosecution examined 10 witnesses. PW Name Nature Deposition 1 Bideo Shah Injured/ He deposed about the incident Complainant and proved his statement Ex. PW1/A. PW1 deposed that he handed over his medical Judgment 3 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others record Ex PW1/C to IO vide seizure memo Ex PW1/B. He also proved weapon of offence as Ex P-1. 2 Ramu Injured (son of He deposed about the incident complainant) and deposed that danda Ex P-1 was recovered in his presence and was seized vide memo Ex PW2/A.	FAC
He also proved pointing out memo, arrest and personal search of accused Parmeshwar vide memo Ex PW2/B & C. 3 ASI Mahavir Duty Officer Proved DD No. 33A as Ex.PW3/A, FIR as Ex.PW3/B, and certificate u/s 65B of Indian Evidence Act as Ex.PW3/C. DD No. 34 B as Ex.PW3/D and his endorsement on rukka as Ex.PW3/E. 4 Monu Injured (son of He deposed about the incident. complainant) 5 Dr Mohd Doctor, Proved X-Ray report of Mustaqueem Radiologist injured Bideo Shah as Ex PW5/A and X-Ray plates as Ex PW5/B to E. 6 Dr Vinal Doctor Proved MLC of injured Bideo Shah as Ex PW6/A and opinion in respect of injuries as Ex PW6/B. 7 Ct Sanjeet Police Went to Hospital with IO and obtained MLC of injured 8 ASI Santosh Police Proved disclosure statements of accused Ram Naresh and Parveen as Ex PW8/ A & B. 9 HC Vinay Police Proved arrest of accused persons, their disclosure statements and seizure of danda Ex P-1. Judgment 4 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others 10 SI Ashok Investigating Proved arrest of accused Officer persons and their disclosure statements.	FAC
Plea of Accused 6. In their statements recorded under Section 313 CrPC, accused persons stated that they were not present at spot and later on came to know that complainant and his sons were beaten by public persons. It is stated that complainant and his sons also gave beatings to public persons as a consequence of same, one Dinesh lodged an FIR against accused persons.	ARG
Defense Evidence 7. In defense, accused persons examined two witnesses. DW1 Dinesh Ram deposed that on the date of incident, a verbal altercation had taken place between complainant Bideo Shah and accused Parveen & Pankaj. On seeing the same, DW1 intervened and took away Parveen and Pankaj with him.	FAC
Dinesh deposed that he sustained injury during the said intervention when Bideo Shah and his sons Sonu, Samu and Monu gave beatings to me. He deposed that a crowd gathered there and public persons gave beatings to Bideo Shah and his sons Sonu, Samu and Monu and thereafter, he got an FIR No. 05/2016 (Ex DW1/A) registered against them.	FAC
Thereafter, Pankaj and Parveen left the spot when I intervened in the verbal quarrel. He also deposed that Bideo Shah was abusing public persons in drunken condition.	FAC
Judgment 5 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others 8. DW2 Pradeep deposed that he used to work with accused Parmeshwar as labor. On the day of incident, at about 05.30 PM, he along with Parmeshwar left the shop of Vishnu Aggarwal at about 06.45 PM.	FAC
From the shop of Vishnu Aggarwal, Parmeshwar went to his house and I also went to his home. Arguments 9. Sh.	ARG
Shiv Kumar Ld Addl. PP for State submitted that PW1, 2 & 4 who were assaulted by accused persons have supported the case of prosecution. It is argued that all injured witness have withstood the test of cross-examination and medical evidence proves the injuries sustained by them.	ARG
It is submitted that case of prosecution stands proved beyond reasonable doubt, therefore, accused persons are liable to be convicted. 10. On the other hand, Sh. Hari Krishan Ld.	ARG
Defence Counsel submitted there are material discrepancies in the statements of complainant, injured witness and eye witness in respect of incident which dents the very basis of case of prosecution. It is argued that in absence of any reliable incriminating evidence, accused persons are entitled to be acquitted in the present case. 11. I have heard Ld.	ARG
Addl. PP for State and Ld. defense counsel at length. I have perused the material on record. Judgment 6 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others Analysis and Discussion 12. As per prosecution story, on 03.01.2016 at about 6 PM, accused persons assaulted complainant and his sons.	FAC
Complainant Bideo Shah (PW1) deposed in his examination-in-chief as under: ...In the evening of the same day when I was opening my shop, accused Pankaj and Parveen came there. Both were carrying wooden sticks (danda) in their hands.	FAC
Both these two accused persons started beating me with their wooden sticks. I called my sons Ramu and Monu who were present on their respective shops situated nearby. I started shouting for help by saying "Bachao Bachao". My sons Ramu and Monu came there to save me.	FAC
Accused Parveen and Pankaj started beating my both sons with the wooden sticks. In the meantime. accused Ram Naresh and Parmeshwar also came at the spot with wooden sticks in their hands.	FAC
All the four accused persons started beating me on my head and other parts of the body with the wooden sticks which they were carrying in their hands. I turned unconscious due to the injuries. I regained consciousness after about half an hour and I found myself in DDU Hospital. Police met me in DDU Hospital.	FAC
Police made inquiry from me and then my statement was recorded by the police which is now Ex. PW1/A which bears my thumb impression at point A. I sustained injuries on my head and sustained fracture in my hand. Surgery of my hand was performed in DDU Hospital.	FAC
My son Monu also sustained injuries on his head during the incident. ........ Judgment 7 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others 13. In respect of incident, examination-in-chief of PW2 Ramu (injured witness) reads as under: On the same day i.e. on 03.01.2016, in the evening at around 05.00 pm, the accused Pankaj and Parveen came at Kabadi Shop of my father.	FAC
On reaching there, accused Pankaj and Parveen started beating my father with danda. On hearing the screaming noise of my father, I rushed towards the spot alongwith my brother Monu from my nearby shop.	FAC
Accused Parmeshwar and Ram Naresh also reached at the spot while carrying dandas. All the accused persons started beating me, my brother Monu and my father. I somehow managed to save myself from the clutches of accused persons and fled away from there.	FAC
My brother Monu and father remained at the spot. 14. PW4 Monu who is also an injured witness has deposed as under: ..... On the same day, at about 7 p.m, accused Pankaj and Praveen even reached at the shop of my father and both the accused were having dandas in their hands.	FAC
At that time I was present at my afore-said shop and I saw that both accused Pankaj and Praveen started beating my father with dandas. My father started crying for help upon which I and my brother Ramu reached at the spot to rescue my father from the accused persons.	FAC
In between, other accused persons namely, Ram Naresh and Parmeshwar also reached at the spot and took dandas from the hands of Pankaj and Praveen and gave beating to me and my brother Ramu with dandas. Thereafter, all accused persons namely Pankaj, Praveen, Ram Naresh and Judgment 8 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others Parmeshwar gave beatings to me, my father and my brother Ramu with dandas and fist blows.	FAC
My father was shifted to DDU hospital by my mother and I alongwith my brother Ramu reached at Acharya Bikhsu Hospital where we were given medical aid. I along with my brother were discharged from the hospital in the night hours. I also sustained injuries on my head due to the beatings given by the afore-said accused persons and I got five stitches on my head. From the hospital, I and my brother again reached the spot where my statement was recorded by the IO.. 15. PW1, 2, & 4 all in unison deposed that accused persons were complainant with wooden sticks and when PW2 & 4 tried to save complainant, they were also attacked.	FAC
Nothing in their cross-examination has been elucidated which dents the prosecution case. 16. PW6 Dr Vinal deposed per MLC Ex PW6/A & note Ex PW6/B, PW1 Bideo Shah sustained fracture on both forearm with fracture of right rib 4,5,6,7,& 8. Injuries sustained by complainant as grievous. PW5 Dr Mohd Mustaqeem proved X-Ray report prepared by him and X- Ray plates (Ex PW5/A to E) of complainant which substantiates that complainant sustained fracture on both forearm with fracture of right rib 4,5,6,7,& 8. Judgment 9 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others 17. Though accused persons have taken a defense that complainant sustained injuries after he was beaten by public persons but there is no evidence to that effect. Accused persons also took defense of alibi and stated in their statements recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C that they were not present at the spot but defense of accused persons stands contradicted by their own witness Dinesh Ram (DW1). 18. Dinesh in his deposition deposed that on date of the incident he got injured due to assault on him by complainant and his sons and in this regard he lodged a FIR ( Ex DW1/A). 19. In the FIR Ex DW1/A, Dinseh Ram mentioned as under: .......	FAC
Bideo Shah lives in our neighborhood whose fight was taking place with Pakanj, Praveen, Ram Naresh and Parmeshwar on 3/01/16 at around 6 pm over littering and Bideo Shah and his sons Sonu, Monu and Shamu were fighting with the above mentioned people..... 20. From the contents above FIR presence of accused persons stands established and it also stands established that they were having a scuffle with complainant and his sons. Injuries on the person of complainant also establishes that he sustained grievous hurt by the assault on him. 21. Hon'ble Apex Court in Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary & Anr vs State Of Maharashtra (2000) 8 SCC 457 while Judgment 10 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others appreciating the evidence in criminal trial is held in the said judgment that only contradictions in material particulars and not minor contradictions can be a ground to discredit it.	PRE
Relevant portion of the judgment reads as under: Only such omissions which amount to contradiction in material particulars can be used to discredit the testimony of the witness. The omission in the police statement by itself would not necessarily render the testimony of witness unreliable.	PRE
When the version given by the witness in the Court is different in material particulars from that disclosed in his earlier statements, the case of the prosecution become doubtful and not otherwise. Minor contradictions are bound to appear in the statements of truthful witnesses as memory sometimes plays false and the sense of observation differ from person to person.	PRE
The omissions in the earlier statement if found to be of trivial details, as in the present case, the same would not cause any dent in the testimony of PW2. Even if there is contradiction of statement of a witness on any material point, that is no ground to reject the whole of the testimony of such witness. 22. In Vinod Kumar vs. State of Haryana , (2015) 3 SCC 138, Hon'ble Supeme Court of India held as under: "24.	PRE
The next facet relates to the discrepancies in the evidence of the witnesses. The learned trial Judge has found discrepancies with regard to the handing of letter by Santosh to Manphul; the discrepancies relating to the place and time pertaining to various aspects stated by witnesses and the identity of the accused at the time of arrest.	RLC
The discrepancies which Judgment 11 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others have been noted are absolutely minor. The High Court has correctly observed that the minor discrepancies like who met whom, at what time and who was dropped and at whose place and at what time, etc. have been given unnecessary emphasis.	RLC
It is well settled in law that minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the core of the case or not going to the root of the matter could not result in rejection of the evidence as a whole. It is also well accepted principle that no true witness can possibly escape from making some discrepant details, but the Court should bear in mind that it is only when discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with the credibility of his version that it would be justified in jettisoning his evidence.	PRE
It is expected to the Courts to ignore the discrepancies which do not shed the basic version of the prosecution, for the Court has to call into aid its vast experience of men and matters in different cases to evaluate the entire material on record." 23. In present case as well, defense has pointed out only minor contradictions in the testimony of prosecution witnesses which does not touch root of the matter. Testimonies of injured witnesses and eye witness have remained through out consistent in respect of mode and manner in which injured have sustained injuries.	PRE
Medical evidence also corroborates their version. Recovery of danda Ex P-1 (weapon of offence) has also been recovered.	FAC
Defense taken by the accused persons stands belied by their own witness. Judgment 12 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others 24. Thus, in light of trustworthy evidence brought on record, it is concluded that prosecution has been able to prove that accused persons caused grievous injury on the person of complainant Bideo Shah. 25. Now, the question is whether accused persons can be convicted for offence punishable under Section 308 IPC for causing such injuries to complainant Bideo Shah.	PRE
Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case titled as Sheila Devi & Ors. Vs. State, Crl. Rev.P No. 217/2015 held as under: 4. To proceed under Section 308 IPC, it is not essential that the injury actually caused to the victim should be sufficient under ordinary circumstances to cause the death of the person assaulted. What the Court has to see is whether the act, irrespective of its result, was done with the intention or knowledge and under such circumstances that, if one by that act caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.	PRE
If an accused does not intend to cause death or any bodily injury, which he knows to be likely to cause death or even to cause such bodily injury as is sufficient, in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, Section 308 IPC would not apply. It depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case whether the accused had the intention to cause death or knew in the circumstances that his act was going to cause death.	PRE
The nature of weapon used, the intention expressed by the accused at the time of the act, the motive of commission of offence, the nature and size of the injuries, the parts of the body of the victim selected for causing injuries, severity of the blow or blows and the conduct of the accused are important factors which may be taken into consideration in coming to a finding whether in a particular case, the accused can be proceeded under IPC . Judgment 13 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others 5. In the instant case, both the parties were acquainted with each other and they lived as neighbours in the same vicinity.	PRE
There was no history of previous animosity or hostility between them. On 25.07.2012, a sudden quarrel took place between them on a trivial issue of raising alleged unauthorized toilet which was objected to by the complainant.	PRE
Again on 26.07.2012 quarrel took place between them on the said issue. In the said quarrel, the complainant sustained injuries on her forehead. MLC (Annexure-C) reveals that one lacerated wound 3'1 c.m. was found on the forehead of the victim.	PRE
Injuries were 'simple' in nature caused by blunt object. The victim did not need hospitalization and was discharged on the same day after prescribing certain medicines.	PRE
Apparently, the injuries sustained by the victim were not sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. The petitioners were not armed with any deadly weapons.	PRE
Only a single blow was allegedly sustained by the victim when a brick was thrown at her by one of the petitioners in the quarrel that had taken place all of a sudden without premeditation. No serious injuries were caused on the vital organ of the victim.	PRE
Under these circumstances, it cannot be inferred that injuries were inflicted with the avowed object or intention to cause death or bodily injury capable of causing death. Merely because a superficial injury was found on the forehead of the victim, it cannot be said that such an injury was caused with the intention to commit culpable homicide.	PRE
The material before the learned Trial Court was deficient to attract Section 308IPC. It was a simple case of scuffle/quarrel between the parties where injuries were inflicted voluntarily and for that the assailants can be proceeded for causing hurt under Section 323 IPC. Judgment 14 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others 26. Hon'ble Delhi High Court in case titled as Surinder Kumar Vs State 1996 V AD Delhi 345 held as under: 7. I have perused the FIR as well as the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 of the Criminal Procedure Code by the Police. No person including the complainant has made any allegation in their statements that injuries were inflicted by the petitioners with an intention to cause their death.	PRE
As already mentioned above, in order to constitute an offence under Section 308, not only it should be proved that the act was committed by the accused but it was committed with the intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder and that offence was committed under such circumstances if the accused by that act had caused death he would have been guilty of culpable homicide. Therefore, the most important circumstances in a case under Section 308 would be that an act should have been committed with intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder.	Ratio
The injuries sustained by the complainant are not such that could in any manner result in the death of the injured persons. The injuries were caused by a blunt object and it was one and a half inch lacerated wound in the scalp.	FAC
The doctor who examined the complainant had opined that there was no evidence of head injuries and it did not even require the hospitalisation and he was asked to attend the Opd the next date. The word 'grievous' against the injuries has been written by the doctor who had not examined the injured and had not given any opinion about his alleged head injuries.	FAC
Merely because an injury has been found on the head, it cannot be said that such an injury was caused with the intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The evidence and circumstances of the case otherwise show that there was no intention or knowledge on the part Judgment 15 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others of the accused to cause such injuries which would have resulted in the death of the complainant as a result of which they would have been guilty of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder.	Ratio
The fact that the petitioners have also been injured and a case under Section 324 Indian Penal Code has been registered against the complainant clearly shows that it was a scuffle between two parties without any intention on either side to cause injuries which might result in the death of the accused. The material before the Additional Sessions Judge, in my view, was not such which could give rise to grave suspicion against the petitioners of their having the intention or knowledge to cause such an injury that had the death been caused, they would have been guilty of culpable homicide. 27. It is not the case of prosecution that accused persons were armed with any deadly weapon nor there is any allegation that injured were attacked to cause injury on their vital parts. 28. On perusal of deposition of complainant and injured witnesses, it is evident that no person including the complainant has made any allegation in their statements that injuries were inflicted by the petitioners with an intention to cause death of complainant.	Ratio
Neither there is any allegation in the complaint or statement of injured persons that they were assaulted with intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Injuries are not such that it could in any manner result in the death of the injured persons.	FAC
Judgment 16 of 17 SC No: 57970/16 State Vs. Pankaj Kumar & Others 29. In the present case important circumstances under Section 308 IPC that act in question was done with intention or knowledge to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder is missing. There is no material on record which shows that there was any intention or knowledge on the part of the accused persons to cause such injuries which would have resulted in the death of the complainant or injured as a result of which they would have been guilty of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder. 30. In the facts, it is concluded that charge for the offence punishable under Section 308 is not made out against accused persons and for causing grievous injuries to complainant Bideo Shah and simple injuries to Ramu and Monu they are guilty of committing offences punishable under section 323/325/ 34 Conclusion 31. In the light of above discussions, accused persons Pankaj Kumar, Parveen Kumar, Ram Naresh and Parmeshwar stands convicted for the offence punishable under Section 323 / 325 / 34 IPC. Announced in the open Court on 7th May 2024. GAUTAM Digitally signed by GAUTAM MANAN MANAN 16:07:48 +0530 Date: 2024.05.07 GAUTAM MANAN ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE-09, WEST TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI	RPC
