Kulbir vs Tejbir Ors on 1 June, 2024 IN THE COURT OF SH. RAKESH KUMAR SINGH ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE-02, NORTH-WEST ROHINI COURT: DELHI. CS DJ No. 75353/16 1. Sh. Kulbir S/o Smt. Krishna R/o E-30, Aman Vihar, Kirari Suleman Nagar, Delhi. .......Plaintiff VERSUS 1. Sh.	FAC
Tejbir S/o Sh. Charan Singh R/o Plot No. 108, Out of Khasra No. 785, Village Kirari, Suleman Nagar, Abadi Known As Balbir VIhar, Delhi 2. Sh.	FAC
Mukesh S/o Pandit Kailash R/o VPO Kirari SUleman Nagar, Delhi ....Defendants Date of Institution : 22.03.2013 Date when judgment was reserved : 22.05.2024 Date of Judgment : 01.06.2024 SUIT FOR POSSESSION, DECLARATION AND PERMANENT INJUNCTION CS DJ No. 75353/16 Kulbir Vs. Tejbir & Ors. Page 1 of 9 JUDGMENT: 1. Plaintiff claims to be the absolute owner of property in shape of plot No. 107, area measuring 100 sq. yards out of khasra no.785, situated in the village Kirari, Suleman Nagar, abadi known as Balbir Vihar, Delhi (hereinafter called the suit property). Plaintiff purportedly purchased the suit property from one Mukesh vide documents dated 24.11.2007 like GPA, Agreement to Sell, Will, Receipt etc in favour of the plaintiff.	FAC
On 28.11.2007, one Tejbir raised certain dispute about the ownership of the property and later on, agreed to purchase the same from the plaintiff for which a receipt was executed and Tejbir given Rs. 50,000/- as bayana but failed to complete the sale transaction. Plaintiff had left the possession of property with Tejbir at the time of said bayana agreement.	FAC
It is the claim of the plaintiff that Tejbir obtained some manipulated challans from MCD and also some manipulated photographs and filed injunction suit against the plaintiff which was ultimately disposed on an undertaking of plaintiff that they will not forcibly dispossess the said Tejbir. The plaintiff further claimed that Tejbir is unauthorized occupant of property and his documents are forged and fabricated.	ARG
Therefore, the plaintiff has filed the instant suit praying that he be declared as owner of the property and defendant be directed to hand over the possession against Tejbir and Mukesh. 2. The defendant Tejbir appeared and contested the suit by filing WS wherein, he claimed that plaintiff has no locus standi and that he had purchased the property from one Nand Kishore through CS DJ No. 75353/16 Kulbir Vs. Tejbir & Ors. Page 2 of 9 documents dated 08.01.1991. He further claimed that plaintiff and Mukesh are friends thereof and want to grab his property. 3. On the basis of pleading of the parties, following issues were framed in this case on 26.05.2014, which are as under :- a) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for decree cum possession as prayed in para a) of the prayer clause? OPP. b) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree of declaration against the defendants as prayed in para b) of the prayer clause? OPP. c) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree of permanent injunction against the defendants as prayed for in para c) of the prayer clause? OPP. d) Whether the plaintiff has concealed and suppressed the material facts and has not approached the court with clean hands as one civil suit between the parties is already pending before the Civil Judge and the present suit is not maintainable in the present form? OPD. e) Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi to file the present suit and the suit is not maintainable and liable to be dismissed? OPD. f) Whether the suit of the plaintiff is without any cause of action and is liable to be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC ? OPD. g) Whether the suit of the plaintiff is bad for mis-joinder of the parties and is liable to be dismissed? OPD. h) Whether the suit of the plaintiff is barred by limitation? OPD. i) Whether the suit of the plaintiff has not been properly valued for the purpose of court fees? OPD. j) Relief. CS DJ No. 75353/16 Kulbir Vs. Tejbir & Ors. Page 3 of 9 4. In support of his case, the plaintiff got examined himself as PW- 1 and tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW1/A.	FAC
He was duly cross-examined by Ld. counsel for defendant Tejbir. He further examined Sh.	FAC
Mukesh as PW-2. He was duly cross- examined by Ld. counsel for defendant.	FAC
The defendant no.1 led the evidence in his defence and he got examined himself as D1W1 and tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. D1W1/A. He was duly cross-examined by Ld. counsel for plaintiff.	FAC
Jaiprakash Malik was examined as DW-2 and was duly cross-examined by Ld. counsel for plaintiff. All the evidence except of PW Mukesh was recorded before the Local Commissioner.	FAC
Upon conclusion of evidence, both the sides were heard. On perusal of the record, I proceed to dispose of the case through the present judgment. 5. It is very interesting to note in the present case that the plaintiff has filed the instant suit against two persons namely Mukesh and Tejbir and said Mukesh was proceeded ex-parte in the present suit.	FAC
Initially, Ld. counsel had put appearance on behalf defendant no.2 Mukesh later on none appeared on behalf of said Mukesh. The said Mukesh was ultimately proceed ex-parte vide order dated 12.12.2017.	FAC
What is of interest is that the said Mukesh has appeared as a plaintiff's witness in this case and has been examined as PW-2. Pertinently the plaintiff himself brought the said Mukesh in evidence without any summons from the court.	FAC
Mukesh has tendered his affidavit in the case as a witness. This shows that there was some kind of collusion between the plaintiff and this Mukesh. 6. It is in view of aforesaid that we have to determine as to CS DJ No. 75353/16 Kulbir Vs. Tejbir & Ors. Page 4 of 9 whether the plaintiff has come before the court with clean hands or not.	Ratio
The plaintiff has not disclosed as to how he knows the said Mukesh and as to why he brought the defendant as a witness in his case. Be that as it may, as per deposition of PW2 Mukesh it seems that he himself had purportedly purchased the property in November, 2007. He has not produced any registered sale deed to establish that he had purchased the property.	FAC
Purchasing the property in November and then selling it in the same month creates a doubt on the bonafide nature of transaction. Had the transaction of Mukesh been genuine, he would have produced a registerd sale deed.	ARG
It is clear that he was playing some kind of fraud and nothing else. Since the said Mukesh can not be treated as owner of the property, he could not have conveyed any right/interest in the property to the plaintiff by executing any type of documents.	Ratio
It is well settled that a person can convey only such thing which he possess. If a person does not possess any right over a particular property, he can not convey anything in respect of property to another person. 7. From the aforesaid, it is clear that not only the plaintiff has suppressed the material facts but also has not produced any document to prove ownership.	Ratio
The plaintiff can not claim any right over the property and therefore, he can not file any suit in respect of the suit property. Consequently, the issue no.4 related to suppression of facts, issue no.5 related to locus standi, issue no.6 absence of cause of action, are all decided against the plaintiff. 8. Issue no.7 relates to mis-joinder of the parties.	RLC
Firstly, a mis- joinder does not impact a suit completely, secondly, the defendant no.2 is clearly a proper party to the suit. As such, this issue is decided CS DJ No. 75353/16 Kulbir Vs. Tejbir & Ors. Page 5 of 9 against the defendant. 9. Issue no.8 relates to bar of limitation and appears to be based on preliminary objection raised in the WS.	RPC
However, the defendant has not explained as to how and why the suit is barred by limitation. Such type of vague pleading really does not raise any ground for issue (See a judgment of Revision Batch of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in " Naveen Garg Vs. Rajrani Garg ").	PRE
Even otherwise, the plaintiff's claim is about 2007 and he filed the suit in 2009 (originally before the civil judge) The issue is decided against the defendant. 10. Issue no.9 relates to valuation of the suit. The defendant has not provided any reason as to why he treats the suit as under valued.	ARG
He has not provided any type of different valuation. Issue no.9 is decided against the defendant. 11. Issue no.1, 2 and 3 are taken up for consideration.	RPC
These issues relate to entitlement of plaintiff. Entire case of the plaintiff is based on the fact that he had purchased the suit property from one Mukesh through documents such as GPA, Agreement to Sell, Will etc.	ARG
The real question is as to whether such type of claim can be accepted or not. 12. A three judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Suraj Lamps & Industries Pvt. Ltd. vs State of Haryana AIR 2012 SC 206 has clearly stated that immovable property can be purchased only through sale deed and GPA sales are not valid.	PRE
Another three judges bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Shiv Kumar vs Union of India (2019) 19 SCC 229 has reiterated that GPA sales are not valid. CS DJ No. 75353/16 Kulbir Vs. Tejbir & Ors. Page 6 of 9 13. In Shakeel Ahmed vs Syed Akhlaq Hussain 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1526, Hon'ble Supreme Court clearly held that on the basis of GPA sales, a plaintiff cannot recover possession of property. Following portions are relevant: "Having considered the submissions at the outset, it is to be emphasized that irrespective of what was decided in the case of Suraj Lamps and Industries (supra) the fact remains that no title could be transferred with respect to immovable properties on the basis of an unregistered Agreement to Sell or on the basis of an unregistered General Power of Attorney.	PRE
The Registration Act, 1908 clearly provides that a document which requires compulsory registration under the Act, would not confer any right, much less a legally enforceable right to approach a Court of Law on its basis. Even if these documents i.e. the Agreement to Sell and the Power of Attorney were registered, still it could not be said that the respondent would have acquired title over the property in question.	STA
At best, on the basis of the registered agreement to sell, he could have claimed relief of specific performance in appropriate proceedings. In this regard, reference may be made to sections 17 and 49 of the Registration Act and section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. Law is well settled that no right, title or interest in immovable property can be conferred without a registered document.	STA
Xxxx The embargo put on registration of documents would not override the statutory provision so as to confer title on the basis of unregistered documents with respect to immovable property. Once this is the settled position, the respondent could not have CS DJ No. 75353/16 Kulbir Vs. Tejbir & Ors. Page 7 of 9 maintained the suit for possession and mesne profits against the appellant, who was admittedly in possession of the property in question whether as an owner or a licensee.	Ratio
The argument advanced on behalf of the respondent that the judgment in Suraj Lamps & Industries (supra) would be prospective is also misplaced. The requirement of compulsory registration and effect on non-registration emanates from the statutes, in particular the Registration Act and the Transfer of Property Act .	ARG
The ratio in Suraj Lamps & Industries (supra) only approves the provisions in the two enactments. Earlier judgments of this Court have taken the same view". 14. Recently, a division bench of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in Veeneta vs Jyoti Gupta dated 22.05.2024 has relied upon the aforesaid judgments and has declined to accept the GPA sales as valid.	PRE
Following observations are relevant: "Further, in law, the chain of the alleged unregistered customary documents dated 04th November, 1999, for property bearing no. D-114, Mahendru Enclave, Delhi, the alleged unregistered customary documents dated 12th January, 2000, for property bearing no. D-136, Mahendru Enclave, Delhi, and the alleged unregistered customary documents dated 09th August, 1999, with respect to property bearing house no. 1601, Outram Lane, in the absence of stamping and registration cannot confer any right, title or interest in an immovable property in view of Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 and Section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 ('Act of 1882'). The said documents are unregistered and inadequately stamped and are, therefore, inadmissible in CS DJ No. 75353/16 Kulbir Vs. Tejbir & Ors. Page 8 of 9 evidence.	Ratio
Therefore, no right, title or interest has enured in favour of late Ms. Vaneeta Gupta in the subject properties on the basis of the said documents, even assuming the same were genuine". 15. Aforesaid clearly indicates that a person cannot claim to be the owner of a property on the basis of the claim that he has purchased the property by way of customary documents such GPA, agreement to sell etc. As such, issue no.1, 2 and 3 are decided against the plaintiff. 16. In view of the aforesaid, it is held that plaintiff is not entitled for anything in this case.	RPC
Consequently, the suit is dismissed. Decree sheet be prepared accordingly.	RPC
Announced in the Open Court on 1st day of June, 2024 (RAKESH KUMAR SINGH) Additional District Judge-2 (North-West)	RPC
