Pappi Mohammad vs State Of H.P on 16 October, 2024 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA Cr. Revision No. 419 of 2019 Reserved on: 27.08.2024 Date of Decision: 16.10.2024. [ Pappi Mohammad ...Petitioner Versus State of H.P. ...Respondent Coram Hon'ble Mr Justice Rakesh Kainthla, Judge. Whether approved for reporting?1 Yes For the Petitioner : Mr. A.S.	FAC
Rana, Advocate. For the Respondent : Mr. Jitender Sharma, Additional Advocate General.	ARG
Rakesh Kainthla, Judge The petitioner has filed the present revision petition against the judgment dated 01.10.2019 passed by learned Sessions Judge Chamba, District Chamba (learned Appellate Court) vide which the appeal filed by the respondent (accused before the learned Trial Court) was dismissed and the judgment and order dated 01.08.2019 passed by learned Chief Judicial 1 Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment? Yes. 2 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) Magistrate, Chamba, District Chamba (learned Trial Court) were upheld. (The parties shall hereinafter be referred to in the same manner as they were arrayed before the learned Trial Court for convenience.) 2. Briefly stated, the facts giving rise to the present revision are that the police presented a challan against the accused before the learned Trial Court for the commission of an offence punishable under Section 380 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as IPC ).	FAC
It was asserted that the informant Avtar Singh made a complaint (Mark A) to the police stating that he and his wife Pinki Jaswal and daughter-in-law Komal Jaswal (PW-3) had gone to attend a dinner on 25.07.2010. Komal Jaswal put her four gold rings, one pair of gold earrings, one Nokia Mobile Phone 3110 and a ladies' make-up kit near her bed and slept.	ARG
She forgot to bolt the door. Somebody entered the house and removed the articles lying in the room.	FAC
Efforts were made to trace these articles but they could not be found. The police registered the FIR (Ext. PW-8/A).	FAC
The mobile number was put on the location tracing and was found to be used by Sunny (PW-7). He disclosed that the mobile phone was handed over to him by the accused person.	FAC
This phone was identified by Vinod 3 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) Jaswal (PW-5) as his own. SI Sher Singh (PW-8) conducted the investigation. He visited the spot and prepared a site plan (Ext. PW-8/C).	FAC
The accused was arrested in case FIR No. 195 of 2010. His custody was transferred. He made a disclosure statement that he had concealed the gold ornaments near his residence after tying them in a handkerchief and he could get them recovered.	FAC
Memo (Ext. PW-1/A) was prepared. The accused led the police to his house and took out a handkerchief concealed beneath the stones of the retaining wall near his house.	FAC
It contained three rings, and one pair of earrings which were identified by Komal Jaswal. These were put in a cloth parcel and the parcel was sealed with 12 seals of impression "T".	FAC
Seal impression (Ext. PW-8/D) was taken on a separate piece of cloth and the seal was handed over to Ram Kishan. The parcel was seized vide memo (Ext. PW-3/A). A site plan of the place of recovery (Ext. PW-8/E) was prepared.	FAC
The statements of the remaining witnesses were recorded as per their version and after the completion of the investigation, the challan was prepared and presented before the learned Trial Court. 4 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 3. The learned Trial Court charged the accused with the commission of an offence punishable under Section 380 of IPC. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. 4. The prosecution examined 8 witnesses to prove its case. HC Pardeep Kumar (PW-1) is the witness to the disclosure statement. HC Hakam Chand (PW-2) is the witness to the recovery of the mobile phone from Sunny and the disclosure statement made by the accused. Komal Jaswal (PW-3) is the owner of the ornaments. HHC Soni Mohammad (PW-4) proved the entry in the daily diary.	FAC
Vinod Jaswal (PW-5) is the witness to the recovery of the mobile phone. Deepak Jaiswal (PW-6) is the witness to the recovery of the ornaments.	FAC
Sunny (PW-7) produced the mobile phone. SI Sher Singh (PW-8) conducted the investigation. 5. The accused in his statement recorded under Section 313 of Cr. P.C. denied the prosecution case in its entirety. He stated that the witnesses deposed against him falsely.	FAC
He was falsely implicated in this case. Nothing was recovered from him and the mobile phone was also recovered from accused Sunny.	ARG
No defence was sought to be adduced by the accused. 5 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 6. The learned Trial Court held that the disclosure statement made by the accused and the consequent recovery of the ornaments based on the disclosure statement were duly proved. The ornaments were identified by Komal Jaswal.	RLC
Thus, the accused was found in possession of the stolen property. The chain of circumstances was complete.	FAC
Hence, the accused was convicted of the commission of an offence punishable under Section 380 of IPC and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years and pay a fine of ₹10,000/- and in default of payment of the fine to undergo simple imprisonment for one month for the commission of an offence punishable under Section 380 of IPC. 7. Being aggrieved from the judgment and order passed by the learned Trial Court, the accused filed the appeal which was decided by learned Sessions Judge, Chamba (learned Appellate Court). The learned Appellate Court held that the accused made a disclosure statement and got the stolen ornaments recovered.	RLC
These circumstances pointed towards the guilt of the accused. The possession of the stolen article immediately after the theft leads to an inference that the accused had committed the theft.	Ratio
Therefore, the accused was 6 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) rightly convicted. However, the sentence imposed by the learned Trial Court was on the higher side.	RLC
Hence, it was reduced to a period of three years. 8. Being aggrieved from the judgment passed by the learned Appellate Court, the accused has filed a present petition asserting that the learned Courts below erred in appreciating the evidence. There was no legal evidence against the accused.	ARG
There were material contradictions in the statements of Komal Jaswal, Vinod Jaswal and Deepak Jaswal. The recovered articles were not properly identified by the witnesses.	ARG
Independent witnesses were not joined while recording the statement of the accused under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act and the consequent recovery, even though independent witnesses were available. Therefore, it was prayed that the present revision be allowed and the judgments and order passed by learned Courts below be set aside. 9. I have heard Mr A.S.	ARG
Rana, learned counsel for the petitioner/accused and Mr Jitender Sharma, learned Additional Advocate General for the respondent/State. 7 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 10. Mr. A.S. Rana, learned counsel for the petitioner/accused submitted that the learned Courts below erred in appreciating the material on record.	ARG
It was wrongly held that the accused had committed the theft. It was admitted by the prosecution witnesses that independent witnesses were available in the vicinity of the police station where the statement was made by the accused and in the vicinity of the house of the accused from where the recovery was stated to have been effected.	RLC
The police had not joined the independent witnesses and an adverse inference has to be drawn against the prosecution. There is a discrepancy in the colour of the handkerchief which was used to tie the ornaments and this discrepancy is fatal; therefore, he prayed that the present revision be allowed and judgments and the order passed by learned Courts below be set aside. 11. Mr. Jitender Sharma, learned Additional Advocate General for the respondent/State supported the judgments and order passed by learned Courts below and submitted that no interference is required with them. 8 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 12. I have given considerable thought to the submissions made at the bar and have gone through the records carefully. 13. It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Malkeet Singh Gill v. State of Chhattisgarh, (2022) 8 SCC 204: (2022) 3 SCC (Cri) 348: 2022 SCC OnLine SC 786 that the revisional court is not an appellate jurisdiction and it can only rectify the patent defect, errors of jurisdiction or the law.	PRE
It was observed on page 207: - "10. Before adverting to the merits of the contentions, at the outset, it is apt to mention that there are concurrent findings of conviction arrived at by two courts after a detailed appreciation of the material and evidence brought on record.	RLC
The High Court in criminal revision against conviction is not supposed to exercise the jurisdiction like to the appellate court and the scope of interference in revision is extremely narrow. Section 397 of the Criminal Procedure Code (in short " CrPC ") vests jurisdiction to satisfy itself or himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, sentence or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of such inferior court.	STA
The object of the provision is to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law. There has to be a well-founded error which is to be determined on the merits of individual cases.	Ratio
It is also well settled that while considering the same, the Revisional Court does not dwell at length upon the facts and evidence of the case to reverse those findings. 9 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 14. This position was reiterated in State of Gujarat v. Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1294 wherein it was observed: "13. The power and jurisdiction of the Higher Court under Section 397 Cr. P.C. which vests the court with the power to call for and examine records of an inferior court is for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and regularities of any proceeding or order made in a case.	PRE
The object of this provision is to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law or the perversity which has crept into such proceedings. It would be apposite to refer to the judgment of this court in Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chandra, (2012) 9 SCC 460 where the scope of Section 397 has been considered and succinctly explained as under: "12.	PRE
Section 397 of the Code vests the court with the power to call for and examine the records of an inferior court for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and regularity of any proceedings or order made in a case. The object of this provision is to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law.	STA
There has to be a well- founded error and it may not be appropriate for the court to scrutinise the orders, which upon the face of it bear a token of careful consideration and appear to be in accordance with the law. If one looks into the various judgments of this Court, it emerges that the revisional jurisdiction can be invoked where the decisions under challenge are grossly erroneous, there is no compliance with the provisions of law, the finding recorded is based on no evidence, material evidence is ignored or judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily or perversely.	Ratio
These are not exhaustive classes but are merely indicative. Each case would have to be determined on its own merits. 13. Another well-accepted norm is that the revisional jurisdiction of the higher court is a very limited one and 10 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) cannot be exercised in a routine manner.	Ratio
One of the inbuilt restrictions is that it should not be against an interim or interlocutory order. The Court has to keep in mind that the exercise of revisional jurisdiction itself should not lead to injustice ex-facie.	Ratio
Where the Court is dealing with the question as to whether the charge has been framed properly and in accordance with law in a given case, it may be reluctant to interfere in the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction unless the case substantially falls within the categories aforestated. Even framing of charge is a much-advanced stage in the proceedings under the CrPC ." 15. The present revision has to be decided as per the parameters laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. 16. Before adverting to the merits of the petition, some facts in the present case need to be noticed.	FAC
First, there is a discrepancy between the original judgment of the learned Trial Court and its certified copy inasmuch as paragraph 12 of the judgment on page 5 is incomplete in the original judgment whereas, it is complete in the certified copy. Consequently, the paragraphs appearing on pages 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 are different inasmuch as extra lines appeared in the certified copy and not in the original.	RLC
Secondly, the statement of the accused recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. by the learned Trial Court is highly perfunctory. Learned Trial Court only put one question to the accused to the effect that he had committed the theft of four 11 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) gold rings, one pair of earrings, a Nokia Mobile 3110 and one ladies' makeup kit belonging to Pinki Jaswal and Komal Jaswal by entering into the house of Avtar Singh and used as a home dwelling.	RLC
The learned Trial Court had not put any question regarding the recovery of the Mobile Phone from Sunny. The statement made by him that a Mobile Phone was exchanged with the accused, the disclosure statement made by the accused and consequent recovery effected pursuant to the disclosure statement.	RLC
Thus, the incriminating circumstances appearing on record were not put to the accused and only one question regarding the theft was put. However, the accused has not raised any grievance regarding his defective examination and the defective examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C. is only material if the question of prejudice is raised by the accused.	Ratio
It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sunil v. State (NCT of Delhi), 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1203 that the defective compliance with Section 313 of CrPC is not fatal in the absence of any prejudice. It was observed: "41.	PRE
In Tara Singh v. State 1951 SCC 903: AIR 1951 SC 441, this Court had the occasion to deal with the object of Section 342 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 which is in pari materia Section 313 CrPC. In that context, speaking for the Bench, Vivian Bose, J. observed: 12 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) "38.	PRE
The whole object of the section is to afford the accused a fair and proper opportunity of explaining circumstances which appear against him. The questioning must therefore be fair and must be couched in a form which an ignorant or illiterate person will be able to appreciate and understand.	Ratio
Even when an accused person is not illiterate, his mind is apt to be perturbed when he is facing a charge of murder. He is therefore in no fit position to understand the significance of a complex question.	Ratio
Fairness therefore requires that each material circumstance should be put simply and separately in a way that an illiterate mind, or one which is perturbed or confused, can readily appreciate and understand. I do not suggest that every error or omission in this behalf would necessarily vitiate a trial because I am of the opinion that errors of this type fall within the category of curable irregularities. Therefore, the question in each case depends upon the degree of the error and upon whether prejudice has been occasioned or is likely to have been occasioned." (Emphasis supplied) 42. In Alister Anthony Pareira v. State of Maharashtra (2012) 2 SCC 648, summarising the law relating to the examination of an accused under Section 313 CrPC, this Court observed: "61.	PRE
From the above, the legal position appears to be this: the accused must be apprised of incriminating evidence and materials brought in by the prosecution against him to enable him to explain and respond to such evidence and material. Failure in not drawing the attention of the accused to the incriminating evidence and inculpatory materials brought in by the prosecution specifically, distinctly and separately may not by itself render the trial against the accused void and bad in law; firstly, if having regard to all the questions put to him, he was afforded an opportunity to explain what he wanted to say in respect of prosecution case against him and 13 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) secondly, such omission has not caused prejudice to him resulting in failure of justice.	Ratio
The burden is on the accused to establish that by not apprising him of the incriminating evidence and the inculpatory materials that had come in the prosecution evidence against him, prejudice has been caused resulting in miscarriage of justice." (Emphasis supplied) 43. In Nar Singh (2015) 1 SCC 496, this Court had the occasion to review a series of decisions and summarise the law as to the courses available whenever a plea is raised before an appellate court that there has been a failure in putting certain incriminating circumstances to the accused while recording his statement under Section 313 CrPC. In that context, it was observed: "30.	PRE
Whenever a plea of omission to put a question to the accused on a vital piece of evidence is raised in the appellate court, courses available to the appellate court can be briefly summarised as under: 30.1 Whenever a plea of non-compliance of Section 313 CrPC is raised, it is within the powers of the appellate court to examine and further examine the convict or the counsel appearing for the accused and the said answers shall be taken into consideration for deciding the matter. If the accused is unable to offer the appellate court any reasonable explanation of such circumstance, the court may assume that the accused has no acceptable explanation to offer. 30.2 In the facts and circumstances of the case, if the appellate court comes to the conclusion that no prejudice was caused or no failure of justice was occasioned, the appellate court will hear and decide the matter upon merits. 30.3 If the appellate court is of the opinion that non- compliance with the provisions of Section 313 CrPC has occasioned or is likely to have occasioned prejudice to the accused, the appellate court may direct retrial from the stage of recording the statements of the accused 14 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) from the point where the irregularity occurred, that is, from the stage of questioning the accused under Section 313 CrPC and the trial Judge may be directed to examine the accused afresh and defence witness, if any, and dispose of the matter afresh. 30.4 The appellate court may decline to remit the matter to the trial court for retrial on account of the long-time already spent in the trial of the case and the period of sentence already undergone by the convict and the facts and circumstances of the case, may decide the appeal on its own merits, keeping in view the prejudice caused to the accused." (Emphasis supplied) 44. In Shobhit Chamar v. State of Bihar (1998) 3 SCC 455, this Court, after examining a series of decisions, held that a challenge to the conviction based on non-compliance of Section 313 CrPC first time in the appeal before the Supreme Court cannot be entertained unless the appellants demonstrate that prejudice has been caused to them.	Ratio
The relevant observations, as contained in paragraph 24, are extracted below: "24. We have perused all these reported decisions relied upon by the learned advocates for the parties and we see no hesitation in concluding that the challenge to the conviction based on non-compliance of Section 313 CrPC first time in this appeal cannot be entertained unless the appellants demonstrate that the prejudice has been caused to them.	Ratio
In the present case as indicated earlier, the prosecution strongly relied upon the ocular evidence of the eyewitnesses and relevant questions with reference to this evidence were put to the appellants. If the evidence of these witnesses is found acceptable, the conviction can be sustained unless it is shown by the appellants that a prejudice has been caused to them.	ARG
No such prejudice was demonstrated before us and, therefore, we are unable 15 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) to accept the contention raised on behalf of the appellants." (Emphasis supplied) 45. Building on the observations of this Court in Shobhit Chamar (2012) 2 SCC 648, which have been extracted above, in Satyavir Singh Rathi, AC (2011) 6 SCC 1, it was observed: "77. ... These observations proceed on the principle that if an objection as to the Section 313 statement is taken at the earliest stage, the court can make good the defect and record an additional statement as that would be in the interest of all but if the matter is allowed to linger on and the objections are taken belatedly it would be a difficult situation for the prosecution as well as the accused. 78. In the case before us, as already indicated, the objection as to the defective 313 statements had not been raised in the trial court.	PRE
We must assume therefore that no prejudice had been felt by the appellants even assuming that some incriminating circumstances in the prosecution story had been left out. We also accept that most of the fifteen questions that have been put before us by Mr. Sharan are inferences drawn by the trial court on the evidence.	ARG
The challenge on this aspect made by the learned counsel for the appellants is also repelled." (Emphasis supplied) 46. From the decisions noticed above, the legal position that emerges, inter-alia, is that to enable an accused to explain the circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, all the incriminating circumstances appearing against him in the evidence must be put to him. But where there has been a failure in putting those circumstances to the accused, the same would not ipso facto vitiate the trial unless it is shown that its non- compliance has prejudiced the accused.	Ratio
Where there is a delay in raising the plea, or the plea is raised for the first time in this Court, it could be assumed that no prejudice had been felt by the accused. 16 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 17. In the present case, no plea of prejudice was raised and in the absence of any plea of prejudice having been raised by the accused, it is not competent for this Court to go into this question. 18. Sunny (PW-7) stated that the accused had exchanged his phone with him. He produced the phone before the police on 07.08.2010 which was seized by the police.	FAC
Vinod Jaswal identified the phone as belonging to him. He stated in his cross- examination that the accused had handed over the mobile phone to him at Dargeti.	FAC
The mobile phone was not exchanged in the presence of any person. He used the phone for one month and thereafter handed over the phone to the ASI Sher Singh.	FAC
The phone was identified by Jaswal. He denied that the phone was not exchanged. 19. It was submitted that he was found in possession of the stolen property and he was not arrayed as an accused.	ARG
It was impermissible for the prosecution to associate him as a witness without tendering pardon to him. This submission is not acceptable.	ARG
It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Chandran v. State of Kerala, (2011) 5 SCC 161: (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 17 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 551: 2011 SCC OnLine SC 558 that the prosecution can cite an accomplice as a witness without tendering pardon to him but his testimony is subjected to usual caution regarding the testimony of an accomplice. It was observed at page 196: "78.	PRE
The argument raised was that this evidence could not be taken into consideration and it would be inadmissible because this witness, though an accomplice was neither granted pardon under Section 306 CrPC nor was he prosecuted and the prosecution unfairly presented him as a witness for the prosecution. The contention is clearly incorrect in view of the decision of this Court in Laxmipat Choraria v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1968 SC 938: 1968 Cri LJ 1124].	ARG
While commenting on this aspect, Hidayatullah, J. observed in AIR para 13 that there were a number of decisions in the High Courts in which the examination of one of the suspects as the witness was not held to be legal and accomplice evidence was received subject to safeguards as admissible evidence in the case. The Court in Laxmipat Choraria [AIR 1968 SC 938: 1968 Cri LJ 1124] held: (AIR p. 944) "13.	PRE
On the side of the State many cases were cited from the High Courts in India in which the examination of one of the suspects as a witness was not held to be illegal and accomplice evidence was received subject to safeguards as admissible evidence in the case. In those cases, Section 342 of the Code and Section 5 of the Oaths Act were considered and the word 'accused' as used in those sections was held to denote a person actually on trial before a court and not a person who could have been so tried.	PRE
The witness was, of course, treated as an accomplice. The evidence of such an accomplice was received with necessary caution in those cases.	FAC
These cases have all been mentioned in Kandaswami Gounder, In re [AIR 1957 Mad 727], and it is not necessary to refer to them in 18 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) detail here. The leading cases are Queen Empress v. Mona Puna [ILR (1892) 16 Bom 661], Banu Singh v. Emperor [ILR (1906) 33 Cal 1353], Keshav Vasudeo Kortikar v. Emperor [AIR 1935 Bom 186], Empress v. Durant [ILR (1899) 23 Bom 213], Akhoy Kumar Mukerjee v. Emperor [AIR 1919 Cal 1021], A.V. Joseph v. Emperor [AIR 1925 Rang 122], Amdumiyan v. Emperor [AIR 1937 Nag 17], Gallagher v. Emperor [AIR 1927 Cal 307] and Emperor v Har Prasad Bhargava [AIR 1923 All 91].	PRE
In these cases (and several others cited and relied upon in them) it has been consistently held that the evidence of an accomplice may be read although he could have been tried jointly with the accused. In some of these cases, the evidence was received although the procedure of Section 337 of the Criminal Procedure Code was applicable but was not followed.	PRE
It is not necessary to deal with this question any further because the consensus of opinion in India is that the competency of an accomplice is not destroyed because he could have been tried jointly with the accused but was not and was instead made to give evidence in the case. Section 5 of the Oaths Act and Section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure do not stand in the way of such a procedure."	Ratio
The Court finally observed: (Laxmipat Choraria case [AIR 1968 SC 938: 1968 Cri LJ 1124], p. 944, para 13) "13. ... It is not necessary to deal with this question any further because the consensus of opinion in India is that the competency of an accomplice is not destroyed because he could have been tried jointly with the accused but was not and was instead made to give evidence in the case." 79. The Court has also observed in para 11: (AIR pp. 943- 44) "11.	PRE
The position that emerges is this: No pardon could be tendered to Ethyl Wong because the pertinent provisions did not apply. Nor could she be prevented from 19 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) making a disclosure, if she was so minded.	Ratio
The prosecution was not bound to prosecute her if they thought that her evidence was necessary to break a smugglers' ring. Ethyl Wong was protected by Section 132 (proviso) of the Evidence Act even if she gave evidence incriminating herself.	STA
She was a competent witness although her evidence could only be received with the caution necessary in all accomplice evidence. The expression 'criminal proceeding' in the exclusionary clause of Section 5 of the Oaths Act cannot be used to widen the meaning of the word accused.	Ratio
The same expression is used in the proviso to Section 132 of the Evidence Act and there it means a criminal trial and not investigation. The same meaning must be given to the exclusionary clause of Section 5 of the Oaths Act to make it conform to the provisions in pari materia to be found in Sections 342, 342-A of the Code and Section 132 of the Evidence Act.	STA
The expression is also not rendered superfluous because if given the meaning accepted by us it limits the operation of the exclusionary clause to criminal prosecutions as opposed to investigations and civil proceedings. It is to be noticed that although the English Criminal Evidence Act, 1898, which (omitting the immaterial words) provides that 'every person charged with an offence ... shall be a competent witness for the defence at every stage of the proceedings' was not interpreted as conferring a right on the prisoner of giving evidence on his own behalf before the grand jury or in other words, it received a limited meaning; see R. v. Rhodes [(1899) 1 QB 77] ." (emphasis supplied) 20 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 80. This case would bring about the legal position that even if the prosecution did not prosecute PW 53 and used his evidence only as an accomplice, it was perfectly legal.	Ratio
The evidence of such witness subject to the usual caution was admissible evidence. The contention of Shri Radhakrishnan that his evidence would be inadmissible because he was not granted a pardon or he was not made accused would, thus, be of no consequence and is rejected.	Ratio
Against this backdrop, after considering the whole material and the findings of the trial court and the appellate court, we have no hesitation to hold that the trial court and the appellate court were right in convicting A-7." 20. Thus, there is no prohibition in examining an accomplice as a witness without making him an approver but the Court has to be careful about his status while dealing with his testimony. 21. Section 114 , Illustration (b) provides that the Court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of credit unless he is corroborated in material particulars. It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mrinal Das v. State of Tripura, (2011) 9 SCC 479 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 810: 2011 SCC OnLine SC 1208 that the testimony of an accomplice is unworthy of credit and his testimony should be corroborated in material particulars. It was observed at page 489: "17. Though a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds on the uncorroborated testimony of an 21 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) approver, yet the universal practice is not to convict upon the testimony of an accomplice unless it is corroborated in material particulars. The evidence of an approver does not differ from the evidence of any other witness save in one particular aspect, namely, that the evidence of an accomplice is regarded ab initio as open to grave suspicion.	PRE
If the suspicion which attaches to the evidence of an accomplice be not removed, that evidence should not be acted upon unless corroborated in some material particulars; but if the suspicion attaching to the accomplice's evidence be removed, then that evidence may be acted upon even though uncorroborated, and the guilt of the accused may be established upon the evidence alone. 18. In order to understand the correct meaning and application of this term, it is desirable to mention Section 133 of the Evidence Act, 1872 along with Illustration (b) to Section 114 which read as under: "133.Accomplice. --An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person, and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice." Illustration (b) to Section 114 "The court may presume-- *** (b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit unless he is corroborated in material particulars;" 19. Dealing with the scope and ambit of the abovenoted two provisions, this Court, in Bhiva Doulu Patil v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1963 SC 599: (1963) 1 Cri LJ 489: (1963) 3 SCR 830], has held that both the sections are part of one subject and have to be considered together.	STA
It has further been held: (AIR p. 601, para 7) "7. The combined effect of Sections 133 and 114 , Illustration (b) may be stated as follows: according to the former, which is a rule of law, an accomplice is competent to give evidence and according to the latter which is a rule of practice it is almost always unsafe to 22 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) convict upon his testimony alone.	PRE
Therefore, though the conviction of an accused on the testimony of an accomplice cannot be said to be illegal yet the courts will, as a matter of practice, not accept the evidence of such a witness without corroboration in material particulars." 20. The very same principle was reiterated in Mohd. Husain Umar Kochra v. K.S.	PRE
Dalipsinghji [(1969) 3 SCC 429: 1970 SCC (Cri) 99] and it was held: (SCC p. 438, para 21) "21. ... The combined effect of Sections 133 and 114 , Illustration (b) is that though a conviction based upon accomplice evidence is legal the court will not accept such evidence unless it is corroborated in material particulars. The corroboration must connect the accused with the crime.	PRE
It may be direct or circumstantial. It is not necessary that the corroboration should confirm all the circumstances of the crime.	Ratio
It is sufficient if the corroboration is in material particulars. The corroboration must be from an independent source. One accomplice cannot corroborate another...." 21. While considering the validity of the approver's testimony and tests of credibility, this Court, in Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab [AIR 1957 SC 637: 1957 Cri LJ 1014: 1957 SCR 953] has held as under: (AIR pp. 640-42, paras 7 & 8) "7. ...	PRE
An accomplice is undoubtedly a competent witness under the Evidence Act, 1872 . There can be, however, no doubt that the very fact that he has participated in the commission of the offence introduces a serious stain in his evidence and courts are naturally reluctant to act on such tainted evidence unless it is corroborated in material particulars by other independent evidence.	STA
It would not be right to expect that such independent corroboration should cover the whole of the prosecution story or even all the material particulars. If such a view is adopted it would render the evidence 23 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) of the accomplice wholly superfluous. On the other hand, it would not be safe to act upon such evidence merely because it is corroborated in minor particulars or incidental details because, in such a case, corroboration does not afford the necessary assurance that the main story disclosed by the approver can be reasonably and safely accepted as true.	Ratio
But it must never be forgotten that before the court reaches the stage of considering the question of corroboration and its adequacy or otherwise, the first initial and essential question to consider is whether even as an accomplice the approver is a reliable witness. If the answer to this question is against the approver, then there is an end of the matter, and no question as to whether his evidence is corroborated or not falls to be considered.	Ratio
In other words, the appreciation of an approver's evidence has to satisfy a double test. His evidence must show that he is a reliable witness and that is a test which is common to all witnesses.	Ratio
If this test is satisfied the second test which still remains to be applied is that the approver's evidence must receive sufficient corroboration. This test is special for cases of weak or tainted evidence like that of the approver. *** 8. ...	Ratio
Every person who is a competent witness is not a reliable witness and the test of reliability has to be satisfied by an approver all the more before the question of corroboration of his evidence is considered by criminal courts." 22. Further, in Ravinder Singh v. State of Haryana [(1975) 3 SCC 742: 1975 SCC (Cri) 202], this Court, while considering the approver's testimony within the meaning of Section 133 of the Evidence Act, 1872 has observed: (SCC pp. 747- 48, para 12) "12. An approver is a most unworthy friend, if at all, and he, having bargained for his immunity, must prove his worthiness for credibility in court.	PRE
This test 24 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) is fulfilled, firstly, if the story he relates involves him in the crime and appears intrinsically to be a natural and probable catalogue of events that had taken place. ... Secondly, once that hurdle is crossed, the story given by an approver so far as the accused on trial is concerned, must implicate him in such a manner as to give rise to a conclusion of guilt beyond reasonable doubt.	Ratio
In a rare case taking into consideration all the factors, circumstances and situations governing a particular case, conviction based on the uncorroborated evidence of an approver confidently held to be true and reliable by the court may be permissible. Ordinarily, however, an approver's statement has to be corroborated in material particulars bridging closely the distance between the crime and the criminal.	Ratio
Certain clinching features of involvement disclosed by an approver appertaining directly to an accused, if reliable, by the touchstone of other independent credible evidence, would give the needed assurance for acceptance of his testimony on which a conviction may be based." 23. In Abdul Sattar v. UT, Chandigarh [1985 Supp SCC 599: 1985 SCC (Cri) 505] where the prosecution had sought to prove its case by relying upon the evidence of the approver, it was held that: (SCC p. 602, para 6) "6. ... The approver is a competent witness but the position in law is fairly well settled that on the uncorroborated testimony of the approver, it would be risky to base the conviction, particularly in respect of a serious charge like murder."	PRE
Once the evidence of the approver is found to be not reliable, the worth of his evidence is lost and such evidence, even by seeking corroboration, cannot be made the foundation of a conviction. The abovesaid ratio has been reaffirmed and reiterated by this Court in Suresh Chandra Bahri v. State of Bihar [1995 Supp (1) SCC 80: 1995 SCC (Cri) 60], Ramprasad v. State of Maharashtra [(1999) 5 SCC 30: 1999 SCC (Cri) 651: AIR 1999 SC 1969: 1999 Cri LJ 25 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 2889] and Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary v. State of Maharashtra [(2000) 8 SCC 457: 2000 SCC (Cri) 1546]. 24. In Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary [(2000) 8 SCC 457: 2000 SCC (Cri) 1546] it was further held that: (SCC p. 479, para 37) "37.	PRE
For corroborative evidence, the court must look at the broad spectrum of the approver's version and then find out whether there is other evidence to corroborate and lend assurance to that version. The nature and extent of such corroboration may depend upon the facts of different cases.	Ratio
Corroboration need not be in the form of ocular testimony of witnesses and may even be in the form of circumstantial evidence. Corroborative evidence must be independent and not vague or unreliable." 25. Similar question again came up for consideration before this Court in K.	Ratio
Hashim v. State of T.N. [(2005) 1 SCC 237: 2005 SCC (Cri) 292: 2005 Cri LJ 143] and Sitaram Sao v. State of Jharkhand [(2007) 12 SCC 630 : (2008) 3 SCC (Cri) 319], wherein this Court has held that: (K. Hashim case [(2005) 1 SCC 237: 2005 SCC (Cri) 292: 2005 Cri LJ 143] , SCC p. 247, para 26) "26.	PRE
Section 133 of the Evidence Act expressly provides that an accomplice is a competent witness and the conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds on an uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice. In other words, this section renders admissible such uncorroborated testimony.	STA
But this section has to be read along with Section 114 Illustration (b). The latter section empowers the court to presume the existence of certain facts and the illustration elucidates what the court may presume and makes clear by means of examples as to what facts the court shall have regard to in considering whether or not the maxims illustrated apply to a given case.	STA
Illustration (b) in express terms says that an accomplice is unworthy of credit unless he is corroborated in material particulars. The statute permits the conviction of an accused on 26 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the basis of uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice but the rule of prudence embodied in Illustration (b) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act strikes a note of warning cautioning the court that an accomplice does not generally deserve to be believed unless corroborated in material particulars. In other words, the rule is that the necessity of corroboration is a matter of prudence except when it is safe to dispense with such corroboration must be clearly present in the mind of the Judge." 26. In Sheshanna Bhumanna Yadav v. State of Maharashtra [(1970) 2 SCC 122: 1970 SCC (Cri) 337] the test of reliability of the approver's evidence and rule as to corroboration was discussed. The following discussion and conclusion are relevant which read as under: (SCC pp. 125-26, paras 12 & 13) "12.	PRE
The law with regard to appreciation of the approver's evidence is based on the effect of Sections 133 and 114 , Illustration (b) of the Evidence Act , namely, that an accomplice is competent to depose but as a rule of caution it will be unsafe to convict upon his testimony alone. The warning of the danger of convicting on uncorroborated evidence is therefore given when the evidence is that of an accomplice.	STA
The primary meaning of accomplice is any party to the crime charged and someone who aids and abets the commission of crime. The nature of corroboration is that it is confirmatory evidence and it may consist of the evidence of second witness or of circumstances like the conduct of the person against whom it is required.	Ratio
Corroboration must connect or tend to connect the accused with the crime. When it is said that the corroborative evidence must implicate the accused in material particulars it means that it is not enough that a piece of evidence tends to confirm the truth of a part of the testimony to be corroborated.	Ratio
That evidence must confirm that part of the testimony which suggests that the crime was committed by the accused. If a witness says that the accused and he stole 27 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the sheep and he put the skins in a certain place, the discovery of the skins in that place would not corroborate the evidence of the witness against the accused.	Ratio
But if the skins were found in the accused's house, this would corroborate because it would tend to confirm the statement that the accused had some hand in the theft. 13. This Court stated the law of corroboration of accomplice evidence in several decisions. One of the earlier decisions is Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab [AIR 1957 SC 637: 1957 Cri LJ 1014: 1957 SCR 953] and the recent decision is Lachhi Ram v. State of Punjab [AIR 1967 SC 792: 1967 Cri LJ 671: (1967) 1 SCR 243].	PRE
In Sarwan Singh case [AIR 1957 SC 637: 1957 Cri LJ 1014: 1957 SCR 953] this Court laid down that before the court would look into the corroborative evidence it was necessary to find out whether the approver or accomplice was a reliable witness. This Court in Lachhi Ram case [AIR 1967 SC 792: 1967 Cri LJ 671: (1967) 1 SCR 243] said that the first test of the reliability of approver and accomplice evidence was for the court to be satisfied that there was nothing inherently impossible in evidence.	PRE
After that conclusion is reached as to reliability, corroboration is required. The rule as to corroboration is based on the reasoning that there must be sufficient corroborative evidence in material particulars to connect the accused with the crime." 27. In Dagdu v. State of Maharashtra [(1977) 3 SCC 68: 1977 SCC (Cri) 421] the scope of Section 133 and Illustration (b) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act, 1872 and nature of the rule of corroboration of accomplice evidence was explained by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in the following manner: (SCC p. 76, paras 24-25) "24.	PRE
In Bhuboni Sahu v. R. [(1948-49) 76 IA 147] the Privy Council after noticing Section 133 and Illustration (b) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act observed that whilst it is not illegal to act on the uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice, it is a rule 28 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) of prudence so universally followed as to amount almost to a rule of law that it is unsafe to act on the evidence of an accomplice unless it is corroborated in material respects so as to implicate the accused; and further that the evidence of one accomplice cannot be used to corroborate the evidence of another accomplice. The rule of prudence was based on the interpretation of the phrase 'corroborated in material particulars' in Illustration (b).	PRE
Delivering the judgment of the Judicial Committee, Sir John Beaumont observed that the danger of acting on accomplice evidence is not merely that the accomplice is on his own admission a man of bad character who took part in the offence and afterwards to save himself betrayed his former associates, and who has placed himself in a position in which he can hardly fail to have a strong bias in favour of the prosecution; the real danger is that he is telling a story which in its general outline is true, and it is easy for him to work into the story matter which is untrue. He may implicate ten people in an offence and the story may be true in all its details as to eight of them but untrue as to the other two whose names may have been introduced because they are enemies of the approver.	PRE
The only real safeguard therefore against the risk of condemning the innocent with the guilty lies in insisting on independent evidence which in some measure implicates each accused. 25. This Court has in a series of cases expressed the same view as regards accomplice evidence. (See State of Bihar v. Basawan Singh [AIR 1958 SC 500: 1958 Cri LJ 976] ; Haricharan Kurmi v. State of Bihar [AIR 1964 SC 1184 : (1964) 2 Cri LJ 344]; Haroon Haji Abdulla v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1968 SC 832: 1968 Cri LJ 1017] and Ravinder Singh v. State of Haryana [(1975) 3 SCC 742 : 1975 SCC (Cri) 202] .) In Haricharan [AIR 1964 SC 1184: (1964) 2 Cri LJ 344] Gajendragadkar, C.J., speaking for a five-judge Bench observed that the testimony of an accomplice is evidence under Section 3 of the Evidence Act and has to be dealt with as such. The evidence is of 29 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) a tainted character and as such is very weak; but, nevertheless, it is evidence and may be acted upon, subject to the requirement which has now become virtually a part of the law that it is corroborated in material particulars." 28. In Rampal Pithwa Rahidas v. State of Maharashtra [1994 Supp (2) SCC 73: 1994 SCC (Cri) 851], while considering the very same provisions, this Court has held that the approver's evidence must be corroborated in material particulars by direct or circumstantial evidence.	PRE
This Court further held that while considering the credibility of the approver and the weight to be attached to his statement, the statement made in the bail application of the approver can be looked into by the court. 29. It is clear that once the evidence of the approver is held to be trustworthy, it must be shown that the story given by him so far as an accused is concerned, must implicate him in such a manner as to give rise to a conclusion of guilt beyond reasonable doubt. Insistence upon corroboration is based on the rule of caution and is not merely a rule of law.	Ratio
Corroboration need not be in the form of ocular testimony of witnesses and may even be in the form of circumstantial evidence. 22. This position was reiterated in Somasundaram v. State, (2020) 7 SCC 722: (2020) 3 SCC (Cri) 465: 2020 SCC OnLine SC 480 wherein it was observed at page 763: "Accomplice evidence 71. Section 133 of the Evidence Act declares that an accomplice is a competent witness and further that a conviction based on the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice is not illegal only on account of it being so. Section 133 reads as follows: "133.	PRE
Accomplice. --An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person, and a 30 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice." 72. It is apposite to notice Section 114 of the Evidence Act, Illustration (b), the court may presume: "(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars." 73. Thus, there appears to be a contradiction between these provisions. The matter is no longer res integra.	STA
We may notice the following statement of the law contained in an early judgment of this Court in Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab [Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1957 SC 637 : 1957 Cri LJ 1014] : (AIR pp. 640-41, para 7) "7. ... It is hardly necessary to deal at length with the true legal position in this matter.	PRE
An accomplice is undoubtedly a competent witness under the Evidence Act . There can be, however, no doubt that the very fact that he has participated in the commission of the offence introduces a serious stain in his evidence and courts are naturally reluctant to act on such tainted evidence unless it is corroborated in material particulars by other independent evidence.	Ratio
It would not be right to expect that such independent corroboration should cover the whole of the prosecution story or even all the material particulars. If such a view is adopted it would render the evidence of the accomplice wholly superfluous. On the other hand, it would not be safe to act upon such evidence merely because it is corroborated in minor particulars or incidental details because, in such a case, corroboration does not afford the necessary assurance that the main story disclosed by the approver can be reasonably and safely accepted as true.	Ratio
But it must never be forgotten that before the court reaches the stage of considering the question of corroboration and its adequacy or otherwise, the first initial and essential question to consider is whether even as an accomplice the approver is a reliable witness. If the answer to this question is against the approver then there 31 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) is an end of the matter, and no question as to whether his evidence is corroborated or not falls to be considered.	Ratio
In other words, the appreciation of an approver's evidence has to satisfy a double test. His evidence must show that he is a reliable witness and that is a test which is common to all witnesses.	Ratio
If this test is satisfied the second test which still remains to be applied is that the approver's evidence must receive sufficient corroboration. This test is special to the cases of weak or tainted evidence like that of the approver." (emphasis supplied) 74. We may profitably also refer to the views expressed in Haroon Haji Abdulla v. State of Maharashtra [Haroon Haji Abdulla v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1968 SC 832 : 1968 Cri LJ 1017] : (AIR pp. 835-36, para 8) "8. ...	PRE
The law as to accomplice evidence is well settled. The Evidence Act in Section 133 provides that an accomplice is a competent witness against an accused person and that a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.	STA
The effect of this provision is that the court trying an accused may legally convict him on the single evidence, of an accomplice. To this there is a rider in Illustration (b) to Section 114 of the Act which provides that the court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of credit unless he is corroborated in material particulars. This cautionary provision incorporates a rule of prudence because an accomplice, who betrays his associates, is not a fair witness and it is possible that he may, to please the prosecution, weave false details into those which are true and his whole story appearing true, there may be no means at hand to sever the false from that which is true.	STA
It is for this reason that courts, before they act on accomplice evidence, insist on corroboration in material respects as to the offence itself and also implicating in some satisfactory way, however small, each accused named by the accomplice. In this way the commission of the offence is confirmed by some competent evidence other than 32 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the single or unconfirmed testimony of the accomplice and the inclusion by the accomplice of an innocent person is defeated.	Ratio
This rule of caution or prudence has become so ingrained in the consideration of accomplice evidence as to have almost the standing of a rule of law." (emphasis supplied) 75. The dichotomy between the mandate of Section 133 and Illustration (b) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act has been explained as follows in Sheshanna Bhumanna Yadav v. State of Maharashtra [Sheshanna Bhumanna Yadav v. State of Maharashtra, (1970) 2 SCC 122 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 337] : (SCC pp. 125-26, para 12) "12. The law with regard to appreciation of approver's evidence is based on the effect of Sections 133 and 114 , Illustration (b) of the Evidence Act , namely, that an accomplice is competent to depose but as a rule of caution it will be unsafe to convict upon his testimony alone.	PRE
The warning of the danger of convicting on uncorroborated evidence is therefore given when the evidence is that of an accomplice. The primary meaning of accomplice is any party to the crime charged and someone who aids and abets the commission of crime.	Ratio
The nature of corroboration is that it is confirmatory evidence and it may consist of the evidence of second witness or of circumstances like the conduct of the person against whom it is required. Corroboration must connect or tend to connect the accused with the crime.	Ratio
When it is said that the corroborative evidence must implicate the accused in material particulars it means that it is not enough that a piece of evidence tends to confirm the truth of a part of the testimony to be corroborated. That evidence must confirm that part of the testimony which suggests that the crime was committed by the accused.	Ratio
If a witness says that the accused and he stole the sheep and he put the skins in a certain place, the discovery of the skins in that place would not corroborate the evidence of the witness as against the accused. But if 33 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the skins were found in the accused's house, this would corroborate because it would tend to confirm the statement that the accused had some hand in the theft." (emphasis supplied) 76. We may finally advert to a recent pronouncement of this Court in K.	PRE
Hashim v. State of T.N. [K. Hashim v. State of T.N., (2005) 1 SCC 237 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 292] : (SCC pp. 250-51, paras 38-42) "38.	PRE
First, it is not necessary that there should be independent confirmation of every material circumstance in the sense that the independent evidence in the case, apart from the testimony of the complainant or the accomplice, should in itself be sufficient to sustain a conviction. As Lord Reading says: 'Indeed, if it were required that the accomplice should be confirmed in every detail of the crime, his evidence would not be essential to the case; it would be merely confirmatory of other and independent testimony.' (Baskerville case [R. v. Baskerville, (1916) 2 KB 658 : (1916-17) All ER Rep 38 (CCA)] , KB p. 664 : All ER p. 42 B-C) 39. All that is required is that there must be some additional evidence rendering it probable that the story of the accomplice (or complainant) is true and that it is reasonably safe to act upon it. 40. Secondly, the independent evidence must not only make it safe to believe that the crime was committed but must in some way reasonably connect or tend to connect the accused with it by confirming in some material particular the testimony of the accomplice or complainant that the accused committed the crime.	PRE
This does not mean that the corroboration as to identification must extend to all the circumstances necessary to identify the accused with the offence. Again, all that is necessary is that there should be independent evidence which will make it reasonably safe to believe the witness's story that the accused was 34 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the one, or among those, who committed the offence.	Ratio
The reason for this part of the rule is that: 'A man who has been guilty of a crime himself will always be able to relate the facts of the case, and if the confirmation be only on the truth of that history, without identifying the persons, that is really no corroboration at all.... It would not at all tend to show that the party accused participated in it.' 41. Thirdly, the corroboration must come from independent sources and thus ordinarily the testimony of one accomplice would not be sufficient to corroborate that of another.	Ratio
But of course, the circumstances may be such as to make it safe to dispense with the necessity of corroboration and in those special circumstances a conviction so based would not be illegal. I say this because it was contended that the mother in this case was not an independent source. 42. Fourthly, the corroboration need not be direct evidence that the accused committed the crime. It is sufficient if it is merely circumstantial evidence of his connection with the crime.	Ratio
Were it otherwise, 'many crimes which are usually committed between accomplices in secret, such as incest, offences with females' (or unnatural offences) 'could never be brought to justice'. (See M.O. Shamsudhin v. State of Kerala [M.O.	PRE
Shamsudhin v. State of Kerala, (1995) 3 SCC 351: 1995 SCC (Cri) 509] .)" (emphasis supplied) 77. To summarise, by way of culling out the principles which emerge on a conspectus of the aforesaid decisions, we would hold as follows: the combined result of Section 133 read with Illustration (b) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act is that the courts have evolved, as a rule of prudence, the requirement that it would be unsafe to convict an accused solely based on uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice. The corroboration must be in relation to the material particulars of the testimony of an 35 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) accomplice.	Ratio
It is clear that an accomplice would be familiar with the general outline of the crime as he would be one who has participated in the same and therefore, indeed, be familiar with the matter in general terms. The connecting link between a particular accused and the crime is where corroboration of the testimony of an accomplice would assume crucial significance. The evidence of an accomplice must point to the involvement of a particular accused.	Ratio
It would, no doubt, be sufficient if his testimony in conjunction with other relevant evidence unmistakably makes out the case for convicting an accused. 78. As laid down by this Court, every material circumstance against the accused need not be independently confirmed. Corroboration must be such that it renders the testimony of the approver believable in the facts and circumstances of each case.	Ratio
The testimony of one accomplice cannot be, ordinarily, be supported by the testimony of another approver. We have used the word "ordinarily" inspired by the statement of the law in para 4 in K.	Ratio
Hashim [K. Hashim v. State of T.N., (2005) 1 SCC 237: 2005 SCC (Cri) 292] wherein this Court did contemplate special and extraordinary cases where the principle embedded in Section 133 would literally apply.	PRE
In other words, in the common run of cases, the rule of prudence which has evolved into a principle of law is that an accomplice, to be believed, he must be corroborated in material particulars of his testimony. The evidence which is used to corroborate an accomplice need not be a direct evidence and can be in the form of circumstantial evidence. 23. This position was reiterated in A.	Ratio
Srinivasulu v. State, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 900 wherein it was observed: "83. As rightly contended by Shri Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior counsel, this Court has laid down two tests in Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab 1957 SCR 953, to be 36 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) satisfied before accepting the evidence of an approver.	PRE
The first is that the approver is a reliable witness and the second is that his statement should be corroborated with sufficient evidence. Again, in Ravinder Singh v. State of Haryana(1975) 3 SCC 742 this Court pointed out that, "an approver is a most unworthy friend" and that he having bargained for his immunity, must prove his worthiness for credibility in court.	PRE
The test to be fulfilled was pithily put in paragraph 12 of the Report by this Court as follows: -- "12. ... This test is fulfilled, firstly, if the story he relates involves him in the crime and appears intrinsically to be a natural and probable catalogue of events that had taken place.	PRE
The story if given of minute details according with reality is likely to save it from being rejected brevi manu. Secondly, once that hurdle is crossed, the story given by an approver so far as the accused on trial is concerned, must implicate him in such a manner as to give rise to a conclusion of guilt beyond reasonable doubt.	Ratio
In a rare case taking into consideration all the factors, circumstances and situations governing a particular case, conviction based on the uncorroborated evidence of an approver confidently held to be true and reliable by the Court may be permissible. Ordinarily, however, an approver's statement has to be corroborated in material particulars bridging closely the distance between the crime and the criminal.	Ratio
Certain clinching features of involvement disclosed by an approver appertaining directly to an accused, if reliable, by the touchstone of other independent credible evidence, would give the needed assurance for acceptance of his testimony on which a conviction may be based." 84. Section 133 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 declares an accomplice to be a competent witness and that a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice. However, while considering the import of Section 133 . this Court 37 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) held in M.O.	STA
Shamsudhin v. State of Kerala (1995) 3 SCC 351 that the court is bound to take note of a precautionary provision contained in Illustration (b) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act, which provides that an accomplice is unworthy of credit unless he is corroborated in material particulars." 24. Therefore, an accomplice is not considered a witness worthy of credit upon whose testimony the conviction can be based unless it is corroborated in material particulars. In the present case, there is no corroboration to the testimony of Sunny (PW-7) that the accused had exchanged his mobile phone with him. Hence, his testimony cannot be considered as evidence against the accused. 25. HC Pradeep Kumar (PW-1) stated that the accused made the disclosure statement on 10.08.2010 in his presence and in the presence of HC Hakam Chand that he had tied the ornaments in a handkerchief and concealed them in a handkerchief in the retaining wall which could be got recovered by him.	Ratio
He and Hakam Chand signed the memo as witnesses and the accused also put his signatures. He stated in his cross- examination that the police station is located at Pucca Talla.	FAC
There are 150-200 houses in the vicinity. About 1500-2000 persons are residing in the vicinity.	FAC
There were shops outside 38 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the police station. He denied that no disclosure statement was made. 26. It was submitted that the testimony of this witness shows that the independent witnesses were available but they were not associated; hence the prosecution case is suspect.	ARG
This submission cannot be accepted. The question regarding the association of independent witnesses during the disclosure statement was considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State Versus Sunil 2001 (1) SCC 652. In the said case the recovery was discarded by the High Court on the ground that no independent witness had signed the memo and it was signed only by the highly interested person.	PRE
It was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that there is no requirement under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act or Section 161 of Cr.P.C. to obtain the signatures of independent witnesses. The requirement of independent witnesses is when the recovery is effected under Section 100(4) of Cr.PC and not when the recovery is effected pursuant to the disclosure statement.	Ratio
It was further observed that the statements of police officials cannot be doubted because they are official witnesses. It was observed: - 39 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) "17.	Ratio
Recovery of the nicker is evidenced by the seizure memo Ext. PW-10/G. It was signed by PWlO-Sharda beside its author PW17-Investigating Officer.	FAC
The Division Bench of the High Court declined to place any weight on the said circumstance purely on the ground that no other independent witness had signed the memo but it was signed only by "highly interested persons". The observation of the Division Bench in that regard is extracted below: "It need hardly be said that in order to lend assurance that the investigation has been proceeding in a fair and honest manner, it would be necessary for the Investigating Officer to take independent witnesses to the discovery under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act; and without taking independent witnesses and taking highly interested persons and the police officers as the witnesses to the discovery would render the discovery, at least, not free from doubt." 18. In this context we may point out that there is no requirement either under Section 27 of the Evidence Act or under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, to obtain the signature of independent witnesses on the record in which the statement of an accused is written.	RLC
The legal obligation to call Independent and respectable inhabitants of the locality to attend and witness the exercise made by the police is cast on the police officer when searches are made under Chapter VII of the Code. Section 100(5) of the Code requires that such search shall be made in their presence and a list of all things seized in the course of such search and of the places in which they are respectively found shall be prepared by such officer or another person "and signed by such witnesses".	STA
It must be remembered that a search is made to find out a thing or document which the searching officer has no prior idea where the thing or document is kept. He prowls for it either on reasonable suspicion or some 40 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) guesswork that it could possibly be ferreted out in such prowling.	Ratio
It is a stark reality that during searches the team which conducts the search would have to meddle with lots of other articles and documents also and in such a process, many such articles or documents are likely to be displaced or even strewn helter-skelter. The legislative idea in insisting on such searches to be made in the presence of two independent inhabitants of the locality is to ensure the safety of all such articles meddled with and to protect the rights of the persons entitled thereto.	Ratio
But the recovery of an object pursuant to the information supplied by an accused in custody is different from the searching endeavour envisaged in Chapter VII of the Code. This Court has indicated the difference between the two processes in the Transport Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad & Anr. v. S.	PRE
Sardar Ali & Ors.1. Following observations of Chlnnappa Reddy, J. can be used to support the said legal proposition : " Section 100 of the Criminal Procedure Code to which reference was made by the counsel deals with searches and not seizures.	PRE
In the very nature of things when the property is seized and not recovered during a search, it is not possible to comply with the provisions of subsection (4) and (5) of Section 100 of the Criminal Procedure Code. In the case of a seizure (under the Motor Vehicles Act ), there is no provision for preparing a list of the things seized in the course of the seizure for the obvious reason that all those things are seized not separately but as part of the vehicle itself." 19. Hence it is a fallacious impression that when recovery is effected pursuant to any statement made by the accused the document prepared by the Investigating Officer contemporaneous with such recovery must necessarily be attested by independent witnesses.	Ratio
Of course, if any such statement leads to the recovery of any article it is open to the Investigating 41 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) Officer to take the signature of any person present at that time, on the document prepared for such recovery. But if no witness was present or if no person had agreed to affix his signature on the document, it is difficult to lay down, as a proposition of law, that the document so prepared by the police officer must be treated as tainted and the recovery evidence unreliable.	Ratio
The court has to consider the evidence of the Investigating Officer who deposed to the fact of recovery based on the statement elicited from the accused on its own worth. 20. We feel that it is an archaic notion that the actions of the police officer should be approached with initial distrust. We are aware that such a notion was lavishly entertained during the British period and policemen also knew about it.	Ratio
Its hangover persisted during post- independent years but it is time now to start placing at least initial trust on the actions and the documents made by the police. At any rate, the court cannot start with the presumption that the police records are untrustworthy.	Ratio
As a proposition of law, the presumption should be the other way around. That official acts of the police have been regularly performed is a wise principle of presumption and recognised even by the legislature.	Ratio
Hence when a police officer gives evidence in court that a certain article was recovered by him on the strength of the statement made by the accused it is open to the court to believe the version to be correct if it is not otherwise shown to be unreliable. It is for the accused, through cross-examination of witnesses or through any other materials, to show that the evidence of the police officer is either unreliable or at least unsafe to be acted upon in a particular case.	Ratio
If the court has any good reason to suspect the truthfulness of such records of the police the court could certainly take into account the fact that no other independent person was present at the time of recovery. But it is not a legally approvable procedure to presume the police action as unreliable to start with, 42 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) nor to jettison such action merely for the reason that police did not collect signatures of independent persons in the documents made contemporaneous with such actions." 27. This question was also considered by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Praveen Kumar Versus State of Karnataka (2003) 12 SCC 199 in which a contention was raised that the statement recorded by the police under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act was not witnessed by any independent witness and the same should be rejected.	PRE
It was held that there is no requirement to associate independent witnesses at the time of the disclosure statement. It was observed: - "20.	RPC
The learned counsel for the appellant, however, contended that the alleged statement, Ext. P-35 was made to PW 33, not in the presence of any independent witness hence the same should be rejected. He also contended that the said statement was made on 2-3- 1994 but the recovery was made only on 3-3-1994, therefore, the said recovery cannot be correlated to the statement, if any, made by the accused on 2-3-1994.	ARG
He also challenged the fact of recovery stating that the panch witnesses for the said recovery cannot be believed. 21. Section 27 does not lay down that the statement made to a police officer should always be in the presence of independent witnesses. Normally, in cases where the evidence led by the prosecution as to a fact depends solely on the police witnesses, the courts seek corroboration as a matter of caution and not as a matter of rule.	Ratio
Thus, it is only a rule of prudence which makes the court to seek corroboration from an 43 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) independent source, in such cases while assessing the evidence of the police. But in cases where the court is satisfied that the evidence of the police can be independently relied upon then in such cases, there is no prohibition in law that the same cannot be accepted without independent corroboration.	Ratio
In the instant case, nothing is brought on record to show why the evidence of PW 33 10 should be disbelieved in regard to the statement made by the accused as per Ext. P-35. Therefore, the argument that the statement of the appellant as per Ext. P-35 should be rejected because the same is not made in the presence of an independent witness has to be rejected." 28. The Full Bench of Hon'ble Rajasthan High Court has also considered this question in State of Rajasthan vs. Mangal Singh AIR 2017 Raj. 68 and gave the following reasons for not insisting upon the presence of independent witnesses during the disclosure statements: 22. We are of the firm opinion that the insistence to keep attesting witnesses present when the Investigating Officer records the information supplied by the accused under Section 27 of the Evidence Act is absolutely unwarranted and rather amounts to a direct infringement in the confidentiality of the investigation.	PRE
There are strong reasons behind this conclusion. We summarize a few illustrations in order to fortify the same: (a) Investigation commences the moment an F.I.R. is registered for a cognizable offence.	Ratio
An Investigating Officer, having custody of the accused cannot predict in advance the precise moment when the accused would decide to reveal the information, which could lead to the discovery of an 44 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) incriminating fact. Thus, if attestation of the information by an independent witness is persisted upon, as a direct corollary thereto, the Investigating Officer would be required to keep the witnesses in attendance right from the moment, the accused is arrested till the information is elicited.	Ratio
This would lead to an absolutely absurd situation and is likely to frustrate the investigation. The very sanctity of investigation and the privilege available to the Investigating Officer to keep the investigation secluded from prying eyes would be compromised. (b) Another possible situation may be that the accused might divulge the information under Section 27 of the Evidence Act to the Investigating Officer at a particular point of time when independent witnesses are not available.	ARG
For adhering to the procedure of seeking attestation by independent witnesses, the Investigating Officer would then be required to summon independent witnesses and request the accused to repeat the information in their presence. At this point of time, the accused may either refuse to divulge the information given earlier or may oblige the Investigating Officer with the information which would then be taken down in writing in the presence of the independent attesting witnesses.	FAC
However, there is a fundamental glitch in adopting this procedure, which would certainly make the information, if any received the second time around in the presence of the witnesses inadmissible in evidence. Law is well settled by a catena of decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court including the judgment in the case of Aher Raja Khima v. The State of Saurashtra, reported in AIR 1956 SC 217 that information of a fact already known to the Investigating Officer is inadmissible in evidence.	PRE
Thus, in case the Investigating Officer, while making an investigation from the accused in his 45 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) custody is provided information under Section 27 of the Evidence Act and soon thereafter, calls the Panchas and records the same in their presence, then he would be recording the memorandum of information already known to him. Such information would be inadmissible at the outset and thus, the entire endeavour would become nothing short of an exercise in futility. (c) There is yet another risk involved, which could severely prejudice the accused if the information provided by the accused under Section 27 is recorded in the presence of independent witnesses.	Ratio
The information under Section 27 of the Evidence Act often comprises of two parts; one being confessional which has to be excluded and the other which leads to the discovery of an incriminating fact and is admissible in evidence to the extent of the discovery made in pursuance thereof. In case, independent witnesses are kept present when the information is given by the accused, the prosecution may make an endeavour to prove even the confessional part of the information as being an extra-judicial confession made in the presence of independent witnesses.	STA
There may even arise a situation where the independent witness present to attest to the memorandum prepared under Section 27 of the Evidence Act is a Magistrate. In such a case, the confessional part of the information under Section 27 of the Evidence Act would almost assume the character of a confession under Section 26 of the Evidence Act thereby condemning the accused to face severe consequences.	Ratio
There is a high probability of this situation arising in cases involving the recovery of narcotics where the Investigating Officer gives an option to the accused that can be searched in the presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer. Contemplating that option to be searched in the presence of a Magistrate is given 46 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) and a search of the accused is conducted and during the process, he is also questioned in the presence of the Magistrate.	Ratio
At this time, the accused may provide information under Section 27 of the Evidence Act to the Investigating Officer which is partly confessional in nature and is taken down in writing and got witnessed by the Magistrate by adhering to the requirement of attestation. In such a situation, the accused would be faced with severe consequences because the prosecution would then, by lifting the prohibition contained in Section 26 of the Evidence Act insist to prove the whole of the information as amounting to a confession made in the presence of a Magistrate.	STA
Thus, the requirement seeking attestation of the memorandum prepared under Section 27 of the Evidence Act does not have any logic or rationale behind it." 29. Therefore, the disclosure statement cannot be discarded on the ground that independent witnesses were not associated. 30. HC Hakam Chand (PW-2) corroborated the proseuction's version. He stated that accused made a disclosure statement that he had concealed the gold ornaments in red, yellow and blue handkerchiefs beneath the stone in the retaining wall which could be got recovered by him.	FAC
He and Pradeep Kumar (PW-1) signed the memo as witnesses. He stated in his cross-examination that the police Station Sadar was located in Mohalla Pucca Talla which had a population of around 47 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) one thousand.	FAC
He admitted that there are shops near the police station. He admitted that people visit the Police Station.	FAC
He did not remember the number of people present in the Police Station at the time of making a disclosure statement by the accused. He denied that no statement was made by the accused and he was making a false statement. 31. The statement of this witness does not show that they have any motive to depose falsely against the accused.	FAC
Nothing was suggested to this witness in the cross-examination to show any enmity or any interest, therefore their testimonies were rightly accepted by the learned Trial Court. 32. SI Sher Singh (PW-8) stated that he got the custody of the accused transferred. The accused made a statement under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act that he had concealed the ornaments by tying them in a handkerchief which could be recovered. A memo was prepared.	FAC
The signatures of the witnesses HC Hakam Chand and HC Pardeep were obtained as witnesses. He stated in his cross-examination that he had arrested the accused in FIR No. 195 of 2010 dated 07.08.2010.	FAC
Sunny was also arrested with the accused. The statement of the 48 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) accused was recorded for 10 minutes.	FAC
The accused had made a statement in Hindi. He denied that the accused did not know the Hindi language.	ARG
The accused was taken out of the lock-up in the evening. He admitted that Sunny is residing in Mohala Pucca Talla located near the Police Station. HC Hakam Chand and HC Pardeep were present at the time of making the disclosure statement.	FAC
Thereafter, they left towards the spot. 33. He stated in his examination-in-chief that the accused led the police to his house and got recovered a handkerchief containing three rings and one pair of gold earrings. These were identified by Komal Jaswal.	FAC
These were put in cloth parcels and the parcel was sealed with 12 seals of impression 'T'. These were seized vide memo (Ext. PW-3/A) and the sample seal (Ext. PW-8/D) was taken on a separate piece of cloth.	FAC
The seal was handed over to Ram Kishan after its use. He stated in his cross-examination that they left the Police Station at 5:10 PM.	FAC
Vinod Jaswal, Komal Jaswal, Hakam and HC Pradeep accompanied him. They reached the spot before 6:00 PM.	FAC
The place of recovery is located at a distance of 5 minutes from the Police Station. He could not tell the weight of the earrings and the rings.	FAC
He had not obtained any bills regarding the stolen 49 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) articles. He did not get the articles checked by any jeweller to verify whether they were made of gold or were artificial.	FAC
Pradhan and Gram Panchayat Members were not associated. He volunteered to say that Deepak Jaswal was called.	ARG
He did not know about the ownership of the retaining wall. He denied that no statement was made by the accused and no recovery was effected by him. 34. Komal Jaswal (PW-3) stated that the police had apprehended the accused.	FAC
The police interrogated the accused and he led the police party to a retaining wall from where the handkerchief was recovered. It contained ornaments.	FAC
She identified the ornaments as her own. The police seized them.	FAC
She had brought them to the Court as these were got released by her. She produced the ornaments in the Court.	FAC
She stated in her cross-examination that she was not aware that the complaint of theft of four earrings was made. Her statement was recorded on 10.08.2010.	FAC
She, her husband, police officials and the accused were present on the spot. She admitted that her ring was not broken from the side.	FAC
The jewellery is kept carefully in the house. She had told the police that the ornaments were kept by 50 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) her in an Almirah.	FAC
She and her husband were sleeping in the room where the theft was committed. 35. Her testimony regarding the identification was not challenged. It was laid by Hon'ble Supreme in Earabhadrappa Versus State of Karnataka (1983) 2 SCC 330 that the ladies have an uncanny sense of identifying the articles of personal use in the family and their testimonies cannot be discarded on the ground that such articles were not mixed with similar articles in a test identification parade.	PRE
It was observed: "12. Our attention was drawn to the testimony of P. W. 13 Narayanareddy who, during his cross-examination, stated that ornaments similar to the gold rope chain and the pair of gold bangles were available everywhere and that other ornaments were also in his house.	FAC
From this, it is sought to be argued that the seized ornaments cannot be treated to be stolen property as they are ordinary ornaments in common use. Nothing turns on this because P.W. 2 Smt. Bayamma, mother-in-law of the deceased, her husband P. W. 3 Makarappa and son P. W. 4 G. M.	ARG
Prakash have categorically stated that the seized ornaments belonged to the deceased Smt. Bachamma. There is no reason why the testimony of these witnesses should not be relied upon particularly when P. W. 2 Smt. Bayamma was not cross-examined at all as regards her identification of the seized ornaments and clothes as belonging to the deceased.	ARG
Even if the seized ornaments could be treated to be ornaments in common use, this witness could never make a mistake in identifying the seized six silk sarees (M. Os. 10 to 15).	ARG
It is a matter of common knowledge that ladies have an uncanny sense of 51 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) identifying their belongings, particularly articles of personal use in the family. That apart, the description of the silk sarees in question shows that they were expensive sarees with distinctive designs.	FAC
There is no merit in the contention that the testimony of these witnesses as regards the identity of the seized articles to be stolen property cannot be relied upon for want of prior test identification. There is no such legal requirement". (Emphasis supplied) 36. Therefore, her identification of the ornaments cannot be doubted.	Ratio
Her statement shows that the articles recovered at the instance of the accused belonged to her and were the stolen property. 37. Deepak Jaswal (PW-6) stated that he boarded the police vehicle in which Komal Jaswal, Vinod Jaswal and the accused were present. They went to the village of the accused.	FAC
He removed one stone from the retaining wall. A red handkerchief was recovered which had 2-3 earrings and other ornaments which were identified by Komal Jaswal. The police seized them.	FAC
He stated in his cross-examination that Vinod Jaswal was his cousin and Komal Jaswal was Vinod's wife. They travelled in the vehicle for some distance and thereafter they went on foot.	FAC
He did not remember the description of the vehicle. He did not know the name of the village. 15-20 houses were situated in the village. 2-4 people gathered at the spot.	FAC
The 52 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) retaining wall was constructed in an open place. He did not remember whether any person was called from the village or not.	FAC
He denied that the memo was not prepared on the spot and that he was making a false statement. 38. His testimony corroborates the statement of Komal Jaswal and the statement of the Investigation Officer. It was suggested to him in the cross-examination that he is a cousin of Vinod Jaswal but this will not make any difference because being related cannot be equated to an interested witness.	ARG
An interested witness is the one who has an interest to see that the accused is convicted somehow. It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Laltu Ghosh v. State of W.B., (2019) 15 SCC 344: (2020) 1 SCC (Cri) 275: 2019 SCC OnLine SC 2 that there is a distinction between an interested witness and related witness.	PRE
The interested witness is the one who derives some benefits from the litigation. It was observed: 12. As regards the contention that the eyewitnesses are close relatives of the deceased, it is by now well-settled that a related witness cannot be said to be an "interested" witness merely by virtue of being a relative of the victim.	Ratio
This Court has elucidated the difference between "interested" and "related" witnesses in a plethora of cases, stating that a witness may be called interested only when he or she derives some benefit from the result of 53 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) litigation, which in the context of a criminal case would mean that the witness has a direct or indirect interest in seeing the accused punished due to prior enmity or other reasons, and thus has a motive to falsely implicate the accused (for instance, see State of Rajasthan v. Kalki [State of Rajasthan v. Kalki, (1981) 2 SCC 752: 1981 SCC (Cri) 593]; Amit v. State of U.P. [Amit v. State of U.P., (2012) 4 SCC 107 : (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 590] and Gangabhavani v. Rayapati Venkat Reddy [Gangabhavani v. Rayapati Venkat Reddy, (2013) 15 SCC 298 : (2014) 6 SCC (Cri) 182] ). 13. Recently, this difference was reiterated in Ganapathi v. State of T.N. [Ganapathi v. State of T.N., (2018) 5 SCC 549 : (2018) 2 SCC (Cri) 793], in the following terms, by referring to the three-Judge Bench decision in State of Rajasthan v. Kalki [State of Rajasthan v. Kalki, (1981) 2 SCC 752: 1981 SCC (Cri) 593] : (Ganapathi case [Ganapathi v. State of T.N., (2018) 5 SCC 549 : (2018) 2 SCC (Cri) 793], SCC p. 555, para 14) "14. "Related" is not equivalent to "interested". A witness may be called "interested" only when he or she derives some benefit from the result of a litigation; in the decree in a civil case, or in seeing an accused person punished. A witness who is a natural one and is the only possible eyewitness in the circumstances of a case cannot be said to be "interested"...." 14. In criminal cases, it is often the case that the offence is witnessed by a close relative of the victim, whose presence on the scene of the offence would be natural. The evidence of such a witness cannot automatically be discarded by labelling the witness as interested.	PRE
Indeed, one of the earliest statements with respect to interested witnesses in criminal cases was made by this Court in Dalip Singh v. State of Punjab [Dalip Singh v. State of Punjab, 1954 SCR 145: AIR 1953 SC 364: 1953 Cri LJ 54 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 1465], wherein this Court observed : (AIR p. 366, para 26) "26. A witness is normally to be considered independent unless he or she springs from sources which are likely to be tainted and that usually means unless the witness has cause, such as enmity against the accused, to wish to implicate him falsely. Ordinarily, a close relative would be the last to screen the real culprit and falsely implicate an innocent person." 15. In the case of a related witness, the Court may not treat his or her testimony as inherently tainted and needs to ensure only that the evidence is inherently reliable, probable, cogent and consistent.	PRE
We may refer to the observations of this Court in Jayabalan v. State (UT of Pondicherry) [Jayabalan v. State (UT of Pondicherry), (2010) 1 SCC 199: (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 966] : (SCC p. 213, para 23) "23. We are of the considered view that in cases where the court is called upon to deal with the evidence of the interested witnesses, the approach of the court while appreciating the evidence of such witnesses must not be pedantic.	PRE
The court must be cautious in appreciating and accepting the evidence given by the interested witnesses but the court must not be suspicious of such evidence. The primary endeavour of the court must be to look for consistency.	Ratio
The evidence of a witness cannot be ignored or thrown out solely because it comes from the mouth of a person who is closely related to the victim." 39. It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Thoti Manohar vs State of Andhra Pradesh (2012) 7 SCC 723 that 55 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the court cannot discard the testimony of a witness on the ground of a relationship. It was observed: 31. In this context, we may refer with profit the decision of this Court in Dalip Singh v. State of Punjab AIR 1953 SC 364, wherein Vivian Bose, J., speaking for the Court, observed as follows: - "We are unable to agree with the learned Judges of the High Court that the testimony of the two eye- witnesses requires corroboration.	PRE
If the foundation for such an observation is based on the fact that the witnesses are women and that the fate of seven men hangs on their testimony, we know of no such rule. If it is grounded on the reason that they are closely related to the deceased we are unable to concur.	Ratio
This is a fallacy common to many criminal cases and one which another Bench of this Court endeavoured to dispel in Rameshwar v. The State of Rajasthan (1952) SCR 377 at p. 390 = (AIR 1952 SC 54 at page 59)." 32. In the said case, it was further observed that: "A witness is normally to be considered independent unless he or she springs from sources which are likely to be tainted and that usually means unless the witness has a cause, such as an enmity against the accused, to wish to implicate him falsely. Ordinarily, a close relative would be the last to screen the real culprit and falsely implicate an innocent person.	PRE
It is true that when feelings run high and there is a personal cause for enmity, there is a tendency to drag in an innocent person against whom a witness has a grudge along with the guilty, but the foundation must be laid for such criticism and the mere fact of relationship far from being a foundation is often a sure guarantee of truth." 56 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 33. In Masalti v. State of U.P. AIR 1965 SC 202, it has been ruled that normally close relatives of the deceased would not be considered to be interested witnesses who would also mention the names of the other persons as responsible for causing injuries to the deceased. 34. In Hari Obula Reddi and others v. The State of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1981 SC 82, a three-judge Bench has held that evidence of interested witnesses is not necessarily unreliable evidence. Even partisanship by itself is not a valid ground for discrediting or rejecting sworn testimony.	PRE
It can be laid down as an invariable rule that interested evidence can never form the basis of conviction unless corroborated to a material extent in material particulars by independent evidence. All that is necessary is that the evidence of interested witnesses should be subjected to careful scrutiny and accepted with caution.	Ratio
If on such scrutiny, the interested testimony is found to be intrinsically reliable or inherently probable, it may, by itself, be sufficient, in the circumstances of the particular case, to base a conviction thereon. 35. In Kartik Malhar v. State of Bihar (1996) 1 SCC 614, it has been opined that a close relative who is a natural witness cannot be regarded as an interested witness, for the term 'interested' postulates that the witness must have some interest in having the accused, somehow or the other, convicted for some animus or some other reason. 36. In Pulicherla Nagaraju alias Nagaraja Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh AIR 2006 SC 3010, while dealing with the liability of interested witnesses who are relatives, a two- judge Bench observed that: "it is well settled that evidence of a witness cannot be discarded merely on the ground that he is either partisan or interested or close relative to the deceased if it is otherwise found to be trustworthy and credible." The said evidence only requires scrutiny with more care and caution, so that neither the guilty escapes nor the 57 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) innocent is wrongly convicted.	PRE
If on such careful scrutiny, the evidence is found to be reliable and probable, then it can be acted upon. "If it is found to be improbable or suspicious, it ought to be rejected. Where the witness has a motive to falsely implicate the accused, his testimony should have corroboration in regard to material particulars before it is accepted." 40. This position was reiterated in Rajesh Yadav vs. State of Bihar 2022 Cr.L.J. 2986 (SC) as under: 28. A related witness cannot be termed as an interested witness per se.	PRE
One has to see the place of occurrence along with other circumstances. A related witness can also be a natural witness. If an offence is committed within the precincts of the deceased, the presence of his family members cannot be ruled out, as they assume the position of natural witnesses.	Ratio
When their evidence is clear, cogent and withstands the rigour of cross- examination, it becomes sterling, not requiring further corroboration. A related witness would become an interested witness, only when he is desirous of implicating the accused in rendering a conviction, on purpose. 29. When the court is convinced with the quality of the evidence produced, notwithstanding the classification as quoted above, it becomes the best evidence. Such testimony being natural, adding to the degree of probability, the court has to make reliance upon it in proving a fact.	Ratio
The aforesaid position of law has been well laid down in Bhaskarrao v. State of Maharashtra, (2018) 6 SCC 591: "32. Coming back to the appreciation of the evidence at hand, at the outset, our attention is drawn to the fact that the witnesses were interrelated, and this Court should be cautious in 58 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) accepting their statements.	PRE
It would be beneficial to recapitulate the law concerning the appreciation of evidence of a related witness. In Dalip Singh v. State of Punjab, 1954 SCR 145: AIR 1953 SC 364: 1953 Cri LJ 1465, Vivian Bose, J. for the Bench observed the law as under (AIR p. 366, para 26) "26. A witness is normally to be considered independent unless he or she springs from sources which are likely to be tainted and that usually means unless the witness has a cause, such as an enmity against the accused, to wish to implicate him falsely.	PRE
Ordinarily, a close relative would be the last to screen the real culprit and falsely implicate an innocent person. It is true when feelings run high and there is a personal cause for enmity, that there is a tendency to drag in an innocent person against whom a witness has a grudge along with the guilty, but the foundation must be laid for such a criticism and the mere fact of relationship far from being a foundation is often a sure guarantee of truth.	Ratio
However, we are not attempting any sweeping generalisation. Each case must be judged on its own facts.	Ratio
Our observations are only made to combat what is so often put forward in cases before us as a general rule of prudence. There is no such general rule.	Ratio
Each case must be limited to and be governed by its own facts." 33. In Masalti v. State of U.P., (1964) 8 SCR 133: AIR 1965 SC 202: (1965) 1 Cri LJ 226], a five-judge Bench of this Court has categorically observed as under (AIR pp. 209-210, para 14) "14. ... There is no doubt that when a criminal court has to appreciate evidence given by witnesses who are partisan or interested, it has to be very careful in weighing such 59 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) evidence.	PRE
Whether or not there are discrepancies in the evidence; whether or not the evidence strikes the court as genuine; whether or not the story disclosed by the evidence is probable, are all matters which must be taken into account. But it would, we think, be unreasonable to contend that evidence given by witnesses should be discarded only on the ground that it is evidence of partisan or interested witnesses.	Ratio
Often enough, where factions prevail in villages and murders are committed as a result of enmity between such factions, criminal courts have to deal with evidence of a partisan type. The mechanical rejection of such evidence on the sole ground that it is partisan would invariably lead to the failure of justice.	Ratio
No hard-and-fast rule can be laid down as to how much evidence should be appreciated. The judicial approach has to be cautious in dealing with such evidence, but the plea that such evidence should be rejected because it is partisan cannot be accepted as correct." 34. In Darya Singh v. State of Punjab [(1964) 3 SCR 397: AIR 1965 SC 328: (1965) 1 Cri LJ 350], this Court held that evidence of an eyewitness who is a near relative of the victim should be closely scrutinised but no corroboration is necessary for acceptance of his evidence.	PRE
In Harbans Kaur v. State of Haryana [(2005) 9 SCC 195: 2005 SCC (Cri) 1213: 2005 Cri LJ 2199], this Court observed that: (SCC p. 227, para 6) "6. There is no proposition in law that relatives are to be treated as untruthful witnesses.	PRE
On the contrary, reason has to be shown when a plea of partiality is raised to show that the witnesses had reason to shield 60 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the actual culprit and falsely implicate the accused." 35. The last case we need to concern ourselves with is Namdeo v. State of Maharashtra [(2007) 14 SCC 150 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 773], wherein this Court after observing previous precedents has summarised the law in the following manner: : (SCC p. 164, para 38) "38. ... it is clear that a close relative cannot be characterised as an "interested" witness. He is a "natural" witness.	PRE
His evidence, however, must be scrutinised carefully. If on such scrutiny, his evidence is found to be intrinsically reliable, inherently probable and wholly trustworthy, a conviction can be based on the "sole" testimony of such witness. A close relationship of the witness with the deceased or the victim is no grounds to reject his evidence.	Ratio
On the contrary, a close relative of the deceased would normally be most reluctant to spare the real culprit and falsely implicate an innocent one." 36. From the study of the aforesaid precedents of this Court, we may note that whoever has been a witness before the court of law, having a strong interest in the result, if allowed to be weighed in the same scales with those who do not have any interest in the result, would be to open the doors of the court for perverted truth. This sound rule which remains the bulwark of this system, and which determines the value of evidence derived from such sources, needs to be cautiously and carefully observed and enforced.	Ratio
There is no dispute about the fact that the interest of the witness must affect his testimony is a universal truth. Moreover, under the influence of bias, a man may not be in a position to judge correctly, even if they earnestly desire to do so.	Ratio
Similarly, he may not be in a position to provide evidence in an impartial manner, when it 61 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) involves his interest. Under such influences, man will, even though not consciously, suppress some facts, soften or modify others, and provide favourable colour.	Ratio
These are most controlling considerations in respect to the credibility of human testimony, and should never be overlooked in applying the rules of evidence and determining its weight in the scale of truth under the facts and circumstances of each case." 30. Once again, we reiterate with a word of caution, the trial court is the best court to decide on the aforesaid aspect as no mathematical calculation or straightjacket formula can be made on the assessment of a witness, as the journey towards the truth can be seen better through the eyes of the trial judge. In fact, this is the real objective behind the enactment itself which extends the maximum discretion to the court." 41. Similar is the judgment in M Nageswara Reddy vs. State of Andhra Pradesh 2022 (5) SCC 791 wherein it was observed: 10. Having gone through the deposition of the relevant witnesses -eye-witnesses/injured eye-witnesses, we are of the opinion that there are no major/material contradictions in the deposition of the eye-witnesses and injured eye-witnesses.	PRE
All are consistent insofar as accused Nos. 1 to 3 are concerned. As observed hereinabove, PW6 has identified Accused Nos. 1 to 3. The High Court has observed that PW1, PW3 & PW5 were planted witnesses merely on the ground that they were all interested witnesses being relatives of the deceased.	RLC
Merely because the witnesses were the relatives of the deceased, their evidence cannot be discarded solely on the aforesaid ground. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has materially 62 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) erred in discarding the deposition/evidence of PW1, PW3, PW5 & PW6 and even PW7. 42. No such interest was brought in his cross- examination and his testimony cannot be discarded because of the relationship alone. 43. It was submitted that the recovery was effected from an open place and it is not sufficient to implicate the accused.	Ratio
This submission is not acceptable. It was laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Limbaji v. State of Maharashtra, (2001) 10 SCC 340: 2001 SCC OnLine SC 1460, that merely because the recovery was effected from an open place is not sufficient to discard the recovery and the statement that accused had hidden the articles could be relied upon to show the possession of the accused.	PRE
It was observed: "IV(b). [14] We are left with the evidence of recovery of the ornaments of the deceased on the basis of the confessional statement of the accused under Section 27 of the Evidence Act if the discoveries are to be believed -- which ought to be. The next two questions are, whether the accused shall be deemed to be in possession of the articles concealed at various spots and whether such possession could be said to be recent possession.	Ratio
But for the decision of this Court in Trimbak v. State of M.P. [AIR 1954 SC 39: 1954 Cri LJ 335] the first question need not have engaged our attention at all. That was a case in which at the instance of the accused the stolen property was recovered at a field belonging to a third party and the 63 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) accused gave no explanation about his knowledge of the place from which the ornaments were taken out.	PRE
The High Court while absolving the appellant of the charge of dacoity, convicted him under Section 411 IPC for receiving the stolen property by applying the presumption that he must have kept the ornaments at that place. On appeal by the accused, this Court took the view that there was no valid reason for convicting the appellant under Section 411 IPC. The Court pointed out that one of the ingredients of Section 411, namely, that the stolen property was in the possession of the accused, was not satisfied.	RLC
The Court observed thus: (AIR p. 40, para 6) "6. When the field from which the ornaments were recovered was an open one, and accessible to all and sundry, it is difficult to hold positively that the accused was in possession of these articles.	Ratio
The fact of recovery by the accused is compatible with the circumstance of somebody else having placed the articles there and of the accused somehow acquiring knowledge about their whereabouts and that being so, the fact of discovery cannot be regarded as conclusive proof that the accused was in possession of these articles." If this view is accepted, there is the danger of seasoned criminals, who choose to keep the stolen property away from their places of residence or premises, escaping from the clutches of presumption whereas the less resourceful accused who choose to keep the stolen property within their house or premises would be subjected to the rigour of presumption.	Ratio
The purpose and efficacy of the presumption under Section 114(a) will be practically lost in such an event. We are, however, relieved of the need to invite the decision of a larger Bench on this issue in view of the confessional statement of the accused that they had hidden the articles at particular places and the accused acting further and leading the investigating officer and the panchas to the spots where they were concealed.	Ratio
The memoranda of Panchnama evidencing such statements 64 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) are Exhibits 26, 28 and 30. If such a statement of the accused insofar as the part played by him in concealing the articles at the specified spots is admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, there can be no doubt that the factum of possession of the articles by the accused stands established. We have the authority of the three- judge Bench decision of this Court in K.	Ratio
Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of A.P. [AIR 1962 SC 1788: (1963) 1 Cri LJ 8] to hold that the statement relating to concealment is also admissible in evidence by virtue of Section 27 . In that case, the question was formulated by Wanchoo, J. speaking for the Court, as follows: (AIR p. 1792, para 9) "9.	PRE
Let us then turn to the question whether the statement of the appellant to the effect that 'he had hidden them (the ornaments)' and 'would point out the place' where they were, is wholly admissible in evidence under Section 27 or only that part of it is admissible where he stated that he would point out the place but not that part where he stated that he had hidden the ornaments." After referring to the well-known case of Pulukuri Kottaya v. Emperor [AIR 1947 PC 67: 74 IA 65] the question was answered as follows: (AIR p. 1793, para 10) "10.	PRE
If we may respectfully say so, this case clearly brings out what part of the statement is admissible under Section 27 . It is only that part which distinctly relates to the discovery which is admissible, but if any part of the statement distinctly relates to the discovery it will be admissible wholly and the court cannot say that it will excise one part of the statement because it is of a confessional nature.	Ratio
Section 27 makes that part of the statement which is distinctly related to the discovery admissible as a whole, whether it be in the nature of confession or not. Now the statement in this case is said to be that the appellant stated that he would show the place where he had hidden the ornaments.	STA
The Sessions Judge had held that 65 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) part of this statement which is to the effect 'where he had hidden them' is not admissible. It is clear that if that part of the statement is excised the remaining statement (namely, that he would show the place) would be completely meaningless.	RLC
The whole of this statement in our opinion relates distinctly to the discovery of ornaments and is admissible under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act. The words 'where he had hidden them' are not on par with the words 'with which I stabbed the deceased' in the example given in the judgment of the Judicial Committee.	Ratio
These words (namely, where he had hidden them) have nothing to do with the past history of the crime and are distinctly related to the actual discovery that took place by virtue of that statement. It is however urged that in a case where the offence consists of possession even the words 'where he had hidden them' would be inadmissible as they would amount to an admission by the accused that he was in possession.	ARG
There are in our opinion two answers to this argument. In the first place, Section 27 itself says that where the statement distinctly relates to the discovery it will be admissible whether it amounts to a confession or not.	Ratio
In the second place, these words by themselves *though they may show possession of the appellant would not prove the offence, for after the articles have been recovered, the prosecution has still to show that the articles recovered are connected with the crime, i.e., in this case, the prosecution will have to show that they are stolen property. We are therefore of the opinion that the entire statement of the appellant (as well as of the other accused who stated that he had given the ornament to Bada Sab and would have it recovered from him) would be admissible in evidence and the Sessions Judge was wrong in ruling out part of it." *(emphasis supplied) 66 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) In the light of this decision, we must hold that the accused must be deemed to be in exclusive possession of the articles concealed under the earth though the spots at which they were concealed may be accessible to the public.	Ratio
It may be mentioned that in the Trimbak case [AIR 1954 SC 39: 1954 Cri LJ 335] this Court did not refer to the confessional statement, if any, made by the accused falling within the purview of Section 27 and the effect thereof on the aspect of possession. xxxxx V(a). [16] In the light of the above discussion, in the instant case, the presumption under Section 114 Illustration (a) could be safely drawn and the circumstance of recovery of the incriminating articles within a reasonable time after the incident at the places shown by the accused unerringly points to the involvement of the accused. Be it noted that the appellants who were in a position to explain how they could lay their hands on the stolen articles or how they had the knowledge of concealment of the stolen property, did nothing to explain; on the other hand, they denied knowledge of recoveries which in the light of the evidence adduced by the prosecution must be considered to be false.	Ratio
By omitting to explain, it must be inferred that either they intended to suppress the truth or invited the risk of presumption being drawn. Thus, the presumption as to the commission of offence envisaged by Illustration (a) of Section 114 is the minimum that could be drawn and that is what the trial court did. 44. Similarly, it was held in Perumal Raja v. State , 2024 SCC OnLine SC 12, that if the accused does not tell the Criminal Court that his knowledge of the concealment was on the basis of the possibilities that absolves him, an inference can be drawn that the accused had concealed those articles.	PRE
It was observed: 67 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) 32. In State of Maharashtra v. Suresh (2000) 1 SCC 471, this Court in the facts therein held that recovery of a dead body, which was from the place pointed out by the accused, was a formidable incriminating circumstance. This would, the Court held, reveal that the dead body was concealed by the accused unless there is material and evidence to show that somebody else had concealed it and this fact came to the knowledge of the accused either because he had seen that person concealing the dead body or was told by someone else that the dead body was concealed at the said location.	PRE
Here, if the accused declines and does not tell the criminal court that his knowledge of the concealment was on the basis of the possibilities that absolve him, the court can presume that the dead body (or physical object, as the case may be) was concealed by the accused himself. This is because the person who can offer the explanation as to how he came to know of such concealment is the accused.	Ratio
If the accused chooses to refrain from telling the court as to how else he came to know of it, the presumption is that the concealment was by the accused himself. 33. The aforesaid view has been followed subsequently and reiterated in Harivadan Babubhai Patel v. State of Gujarat ( 2013) 7 SCC 45, Vasanta Sampat Dupare v. State of Maharashtra ( 2015) 1 SCC 253, State of Maharashtra v. Damu S/o Gopinath Shinde (2000) 6 SCC 269, and Rumi Bora Dutta v. State of Assam (2013) 7 SCC 417." 45. In the present case the accused has not given any explanation, therefore, the only inference which can be drawn is that the accused has concealed the ornaments. 46. It was submitted that there is a discrepancy in the colour of the handkerchief. Deepak Jaswal (PW-6) stated that 68 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) the red handkerchief was taken out by the accused whereas Hakam Chand (PW-2) stated that the accused disclosed that he had concealed a red, yellow, and blue handkerchief.	PRE
This discrepancy will not assist the accused. The statement was made on 10.07.2010 whereas the statement was recorded in the Court on 09.01.2019 after the lapse of 9 years. The discrepancy is bound to come with time and is not sufficient to discard the prosecution case.	Ratio
It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirji Bhai versus State of Gujarat 1983 (3) SCC 217 that the mere discrepancy in the statement of a witness is not sufficient to discard his testimony. It was observed: "(1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic memory and to recall the details of an incident.	PRE
It is not as if a videotape is replayed on the mental screen. (2) Ordinarily, it so happens that a witness is overtaken by events, the witness could not have anticipated the occurrence, which so often has an element of surprise. The mental faculties, therefore, cannot be expected to be attuned to absorb the details. (3) The powers of observation differ from person to person.	Ratio
What one may notice, another may not. An object or movement might emboss its image on one person's mind, whereas it might go unnoticed on the part of another. (4) By and large, people cannot accurately recall a 69 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) conversation and reproduce the very words used by them or heard by them.	Ratio
They can only recall the main purport of the conversation. It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder. (5) In regard to the exact time of an incident or the time duration of an occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guesswork impulsively at the time of interrogation.	Ratio
And one cannot expect people to make very precise or reliable estimates in such matters. Again, it depends on the time sense of individuals, which varies from person to person. (6) Ordinarily, a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the sequence of events, which take place in rapid succession or in a short time span. A witness is liable to get confused, or mixed up when interrogated later on. (7) A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be overawed by the Court atmosphere and the piercing cross-examination made by counsel and out of nervousness mix up facts gets confused regarding the sequence of events or fills up details from imagination on the spur of the moment. The subconscious mind of the witness sometimes so operates on account of the fear of looking foolish or being disbelieved though the witness is giving a truthful and honest account of the occurrence witnessed by him - perhaps it is a sort of psychological defence mechanism activated on the spur of the moment." (Emphasis supplied)" 47. This position was reiterated in Balu Sudam Khalde and another Versus State of Maharashtra AIR 2023 SC 1736, wherein it was observed as under:- "25.	PRE
The appreciation of ocular evidence is a hard task. There is no fixed or straightjacket formula for apprecia- tion of the ocular evidence.	Ratio
The judicially evolved princi- 70 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) ples for appreciation of ocular evidence in a criminal case can be enumerated as under: "I. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a ring of truth.	Ratio
Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the Court to scrutinize the evidence more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies, drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is against the general tenor of the evidence given by the witness and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief. II. If the Court before whom the witness gives evidence had the opportunity to form the opinion about the general tenor of evidence given by the witness, the appellate court which did not have this benefit will have to attach due weight to the appreciation of evidence by the trial court and unless there are reasons weighty and formidable it would not be proper to reject the evidence on the ground of minor variations or infirmities in the matter of trivial details. III.	Ratio
When an eyewitness is examined at length it is quite possible for him to make some discrepancies. But courts should bear in mind that it is only when discrepancies in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with the credibility of his version that the court is justified in jettisoning his evidence. IV. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn out of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to some technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the 71 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) evidence as a whole. V. Too serious a view to be adopted on mere variations falling in the narration of an incident (either as between the evidence of two witnesses or as between two statements of the same witness) is an unrealistic approach for judicial scrutiny. VI.	Ratio
By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a photographic memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is not as if a video tape is replayed on the mental screen. VII.	Ratio
Ordinarily it so happens that a witness is overtaken by events. The witness could not have anticipated the occurrence, which so often has an element of surprise.	FAC
The mental faculties therefore cannot be expected to be attuned to absorb the details. VIII. The powers of observation differ from person to person.	Ratio
What one may notice, another may not. An object or movement might emboss its image on one person's mind whereas it might go unnoticed on the part of another. IX.	Ratio
By and large people cannot accurately recall a conversation and reproduce the very words used by them or heard by them. They can only recall the main purport of the conversation.	Ratio
It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder. X. In regard to the exact time of an incident, or the time duration of an occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guesswork on the spur of the moment at the time of interrogation.	Ratio
And one cannot expect people to make very precise or reliable estimates in such matters. Again, it depends on the time sense of individuals which varies from person to person. XI. Ordinarily a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately the sequence of events, which take place 72 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) in rapid succession or in a short time span. A witness is liable to get confused, or mixed up when interrogated later on. XII. A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be overawed by the court atmosphere and the piercing cross-examination by counsel and out of nervousness mix up facts, get confused regarding the sequence of events, or fill up details from imagination on the spur of the moment.	Ratio
The subconscious mind of the witness sometimes operates on account of the fear of looking foolish or being disbelieved though the witness is giving a truthful and honest account of the occurrence witnessed by him. XIII. A former statement though seemingly inconsistent with the evidence need not necessarily be sufficient to amount to contradiction. Unless the former statement has the potency to discredit the latter statement, even if the latter statement is at variance with the former to some extent it would not be helpful to contradict that witness." [See Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gu- jarat 1983 Cri LJ 1096 : (AIR 1983 SC 753) Leela Ram v. State of Haryana AIR 1995 SC 3717 and Tahsildar Singh v. State of UP (AIR 1959 SC 1012)] 48. Hence, the prosecution case cannot be rejected due to the discrepancy in the colour of the handkerchief. 49. Thus, it was duly proved that the accused had got recovered the ornaments that belonged to Komal Jaswal and were stolen.	Ratio
No explanation was provided by the accused and the only inference which could have been drawn was that the 73 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) accused had stolen the articles and the learned Trial Court had rightly drawn this inference. 50. It was submitted that the ornaments were not identified by the jeweller. However, there was no necessity to do so.	RLC
Even, if the ornaments were artificial, their removal out of possession of Komal Jaswal amounted to theft and no advantage can be derived from the fact that the ornaments were not proved to be made of gold. 51. It was submitted that witness Komal Jasal was careless in dealing with the ornaments. She had not bolted the door of the room in which she was sleeping and had kept the ornaments near her bed.	ARG
This submission does not assist the accused. Komal Jaswal was residing in her home and her carelessness will not give any license to the accused to commit the theft of the ornaments by entering into her building.	Ratio
Therefore, no advantage can be derived from this submission. 52. The learned Trial Court had sentenced the accused to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years. Learned Appellate Court had reduced it to three years. Keeping in view the fact that the accused had committed the theft from the 74 ( 2024:HHC:9774 ) dwelling home, the sentence of three years cannot be said to be excessive and no interference is required with the same. 53. In view of the above, there is no reason to interfere with the judgments and order passed by learned Courts below. Hence, the present revision is dismissed. 54. Pending application(s), if any, also stand(s) disposed of.	RPC
Digitally signed by (Rakesh Kainthla) KARAN SINGH Judge GULERIA 16th October, 2024	RPC
